 
 
 
 
CASE: E-165 
DATE:  6/18/04 
Alicia Seiger prepared this case under the supervision of Robert Chess as the basis for class discussion rather than to illustr ate 
either effective or ineffective handling of an administrative situation. 
Copyright © 2003 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.  All rights reserved.  To order copies or 
request permission to reproduce materials, e-mail the Case Writing Office at: cwo@gsb.stanford.edu  or write: Case Writing 
Office, Stanford Graduate School of Business, 518 Memorial Way, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-5015.  No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system , used in a spreadsheet, or tran smitted in any form or by any 
means –– electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise –– without the permission of the Stanford Graduate 
School of Business. 
  
 
NOTE ON MARKET RESEARCH  
 
 I
NTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW  
 
Market research often is considered a tool used  only by big brand-based companies.  While it can 
be a key to success for large firms that devot e extensive resources towards fine-tuning the 
slightest variations of a single product – from the combination of colors on the label to the position of the product on a grocery store shelf – market research also can drive success for entrepreneurs.  Entrepreneurs can use market res earch to gain insights on issues such as the 
market size, market growth, and customer need for a product or service, and answer fundamental 
questions on the viability of their business concept and business model.   While market research for early stage companies is limited by the reality of time and money constraints, the value gained through improved in sights into the market and customers should not 
be underestimated.  The goal of this note is to provide entrepreneurs with an understanding of 
how to use market research and market information to test the validity of a business concept and to refine a business plan.  It will introduce the key questions entrepreneurs should consider, the 
techniques entrepreneurs could use to gather in formation to address those questions, and the 
practical considerations for collecting and interpreting data.  
Key questions 
 
At the initial stage of starting a new business, en trepreneurs need to gain a rapid understanding 
of the market size, market dynamics, and customer  need for the product or service they plan to 
offer.  Even start-up teams with many years of industry experience should not rely solely on their 
collective experience and intuition to develop a vi ewpoint on these fundamental issues.  The best 
way to test market assumptions and to develop insight into customer needs is through market research.  Analysis of market research data can  provide important insigh ts, which increase the 
odds that the company will be meeting a valued cu stomer need and that the initial strategy will 
be successful.  Note on Market Research E-165    
 p. 2 
There are three overarching questions that an entrepreneur should seek to answer with any 
market research plan.  They are:  
(1) Is the business concept viable from a market and technical perspective?  (2) What are the major risks and information holes in this venture and what information is 
needed to characterize and minimize these risks?   
(3) Is our strategy and business model likely to succeed?  
 For example, an entrepreneur might be consider ing starting a business to provide landlords with 
eviction, credit, and work record information to en able them to evaluate the credit-worthiness of 
potential renters.  Before going forward with this  business concept, an entrepreneur would want 
to develop enough understanding to feel c onfident answering questions such as:   
 
/G131/G3Is there a real need for this service? If so, is the market large enough to justify starting the 
business and to intere st investors?   
/G131/G3Is the value proposition compelling enough fo r landlords to buy a new service from a 
new company?   
/G131/G3Will the sales cycle be so long that building the business may not be practical?  
/G131/G3Can the service be sold at a price that will enable profitably of the venture?   
 A well-conceived market research  program done before investing significant time and resources 
in the business should be able to help answer these questions. 
 
Process 
 
The market research process for entrepreneurs is different than the process for established 
companies.  The questions are much broader and more fundamental, the available resources are fewer, and the time urgency is usually greater .  In addition, entrepreneurs often have an 
incomplete understanding of the market for their product and limited direct experience with 
potential customers.  The recommended process fo r conducting entrepreneurial market research 
reflects these differences by including: (1) pr ototyping of business designs to focus market 
research work, (2) an emphasis on expert interv iews to help identify information needs and 
jump-start market understanding, (3) greater use of exploratory (broad-based, open-ended) tools, 
and (4) multiple iterations of da ta gathering to enable honing of the business concept based on 
market research inputs.  Entrepreneurs can em ploy the seven-step process outlined below to 
pursue the answers to market research questions:  
Step 1:  Prioritize information needs based on using prototype business designs to 
identify key assumptions, and unknowns upon which the success of the business concept hinges. 
Step 2:    Conduct expert interviews in orde r to identify and verify information 
needs and gather market, customer, and business insights. 
Step 3:  Develop a secondary and primary research data-gathering plan. 
Step 4:  Conduct secondary data review and initial prima ry research. 
Step 5:  Revise assumptions and the data-gathering plan based on initial learning. 
Step 6:  Conduct further expert interviews, prima ry research and review additional 
secondary data. You may need to ite rate Steps 5 and 6 several times. Note on Market Research E-165    
 p. 3
Step 7:  Review and revise business assumptions and initial strategy, and assess 
viability of the business concept based on interpretation of the data. 
 
STEP 1: P RIORITIZE INFORMATION NEEDS BASED ON PROTOTYPE BUSINESS DESIGNS  
 
Step 1a – Develop Prototypes for Business Designs 
The initial step for an entrepreneur who wants to test a business concept is deciding what 
questions to ask and what research data to gather.  It is generally not efficient to broadly research 
a market area without first clearly identifyi ng the key assumptions and unknowns upon which 
success of the business concept hinges.  Early focus is needed since resources and time are limited.  But there is often a chicken and egg problem in developing your list of market research needs.  In order to identify the key assumptions  and unknowns, you need to define the basics of 
the business such as the sales channel, product or  service offering, and target market.  On the 
other hand, it is difficult to design a business model without the market research data.   
 One way out of this conundrum is to develop a sm all number (one to three)  of prototype business 
designs.  Similar to using rapid product prototyping to refine product ideas and test consumer acceptance, you can use business design prototypes to quickly explore, through economic modeling and market research data, which types of business models are most promising and which, if any, are viable.  The prototypes should be  different enough to highlight key choices.   
 For example, you might be considering starting a business based on a chemical that, when added to toothpaste, whitens teeth better than anything  currently available.  Rather than broadly 
researching toothpaste distribution, market si ze, need, competitive space, consumer needs, 
development costs, product pricing, you can focus your market research on a few potential 
business designs.  One business design could be  to develop a new toothpaste that would be 
marketed directly to consumers, positioned at th e high end, detailed to de ntists, and distributed 
through drug stores and high end grocery stores .  At the other end of the spectrum, another 
design would be to license the use of the chemical to multiple current toothpaste manufactures, build an R&D capability to develop improved ch emicals to license, and to look for other 
whitening applications of the chemicals.   The economics, business model, key assumptions and success factors for these two business designs will be very different.  Researching the market potential, risks, viability, and key issues for each design will focus your market research and lead to understanding that will enable you to  develop an optimal business model.   
 
Step 1b – Prioritize needs based on prototype business designs. 
Once you have developed prototypes for your busine ss designs, the next step is to prioritize your 
information needs.  In developing your information priorities, factor in the importance of the information to your business success, whether this information will significantly reduce risk, and the difficulty of gathering the information.  Belo w are lists of key questions on various topics 
about which market research can help you gain greater insight.  The key assumptions for your 
business will likely include one or more of the following:    On the market opportunity and competitive environment: 
o Is the market big enough and at what rate is it growing or shrinking? Note on Market Research E-165    
 p. 4
o Is there a need compared to current and expected alternatives? 
o Is the value proposition compelling enough to buy from a new player? 
o How does our offering compare to what competitors are doing now 
and expect to be doing?  
  
On the business model and strategy: 
o Are pricing assumptions realistic? 
o How would the market react to  different business models? 
o What are the economics of the value chain and where can I 
realistically enter? 
o Does the segmentation and entry strategy match market realities? 
o Which segments are most attractive?  Which are easiest to enter? 
 On the sales and distribution channels: 
o What is the purchasing unit and is there a cost effective way of 
reaching it? 
o How does the sales cycle and adoption rate affect the financial model? 
o Are there sufficient early adopters to support the company?  
 On using benchmarking to develop and vet assumptions: 
o What are realistic R&D development times and costs?  
o What production costs and capital i nvestment assumptions should be 
used?  
 
Entrepreneurs invariably are operating on limite d budgets and condensed time lines; therefore 
prioritization is critical to every step of the process.  Market research demands constant evaluation of the attractiveness of different prot otype designs.  As you collect more data, you 
will need to eliminate or modify prototypes.  Keep your research focused and discard less than optimal ideas quickly. 
  
S
TEP 2: C ONDUCT EXPERT INTERVIEWS  
 
An excellent way to jump-start your market re search program is through early use of industry 
experts.  Industry experts are people with in  depth understanding of markets and customers 
relevant to your new business. They typicall y have a broader perspective than individual 
customers.  Experts can (1) give you initial “reality checks” on market and customer assumptions, the value proposition for your produc t or service concept, and how your product 
compares to competitive offerings,  (2) provide ideas on how to refine your business concept and strategy to increase your chances of success,  (3) raise additional questions that should be 
addressed during your market research and help re fine your prioritization of information needs, 
and (4) help locate sources of secondary data a nd primary interview subj ects.  Experts can be 
current or retired executives or professionals in  the field, consultants, industry stock analysts, 
investors, or industry association staff.  Expert s can be identified throu gh networking (alumni, 
friends, mentors, professional cont acts, professors, stock analysts ), industry news stories, and 
industry associations.  Note on Market Research E-165    
 p. 5
Since experts will have different perspectives  and knowledge bases, you should try to conduct 
early interviews with at least 3-5 industry experts.   The value of the data gathered from expert 
interviews in accelerating a market research program can be enormous.  It can allow you to identify the key issues and to modify prototype bu siness designs months ear lier than if you relied 
only on secondary and primary customer research. 
 
S
TEP 3: D EVELOP A DATA GATHERING PLAN  
 
Once you have prioritized your information needs, and reviewed and modified them based on 
industry expert interviews, the next step is to  develop a plan to identify tools, sources and 
methods for gathering market.  The two main cat egories of information gathering techniques are 
primary research (includes data gathered directly from potential customers using interviews, focus groups, surveys, choice modeling, and concep t testing) and secondary research (any data 
gathered collected by one party and then put to  use by a second party).  Any market research 
plan will include a mix of generating primary da ta and reviewing secondary research.      
 
Secondary data  
 
Secondary data – data devel oped by others – provides gene ral background information and 
broad-brush market size and comp etitive information.  Since it is typically faster and easier to 
use data generated by others than to develop the data yourself, secondary research is usually the 
first step in collecting market information.  There are a number of sources for collecting 
secondary data including: 
 
/G131/G3Market reports (source: market research fi rms, stock analysts, census and government 
data) 
/G131/G3News/Trade Journal/Research/Magazine articles 
/G131/G3Competitor literature and websites 
/G131/G3Industry organizations 
 
There are several considerations  to take into account when surveying secondary data.  The 
source may have segmented the data in a way that  does not match your needs (i.e. the computer 
printer market may be $10 billion, but that does not tell you the market for a high quality, high throughput color printers), the data you find may be few years old, or it may be biased (stock 
analysts and market researchers often are not objective), and in some cases, the quality of the work is unknown.  Despite these concerns, a thor ough review of the secondary data will allow 
you to learn of key industry trends, gather mu ch of the aggregate customer and market data 
needed to develop market size and growth estimates, perform initial competitive intelligence, and identify where to focus your primary data generation work.  
  
Primary Data 
 
There is no substitute for direct interviews and feedback with potential customers when it comes to understanding whether a proposed product or se rvice meets customer needs, determining how 
the offering should be modified to increase the odds of success, and for gaining an appreciation 
of the sales cycle and value proposition.  While the data from primary research is sometimes Note on Market Research E-165    
 p. 6
messy, contradictory, and inconc lusive, the insights and market intuition gained from direct 
interaction with potential customers can be invaluable.    There are two categories of primary data collec tion – exploratory and confirmatory.  Exploratory 
data collection tools are used to gain broad- based understandings and insights from a single 
market research interaction.  Exploratory data  collection techniques in clude interviews with 
potential customers, expert advisors, and so metimes focus groups.  Exploratory techniques 
typically yield a wide range of valuable cust omer insights, but imprecise data.  Business 
viability, however, rarely rests on small differences and exact answers at the initial stages of venture formation.  Usually entrepreneurs are seeking “ball park” estimates to test their 
assumptions  - i.e. do 10,000 or 100,000 people need  high-end microscopes?  Will the sales cycle 
take three months or 18 months?  Can th is product be priced for $20,000 or $200,000?   
 
Tools for confirmatory data collection include: focus groups, surveys, choice modeling and 
concept testing.  Entrepreneurs do not tend to employ these tools until the market is well understood and the company’s challenges have been clearly identified.  This is typically after a 
business plan is developed and financing is se cured.  Confirmatory data collection should be 
used earlier if there is an important issue for which having a more precise, higher confidence answer is key to the viability of the business concept.     
 
   Primary Data Gathering Techniques  
/G120/G3Interviews  – Interviews with potential users, distri butors, and buyers should be part of 
nearly every market research plan.  They are often the best source of information for 
testing assumptions with regard to the value proposition, segmentation, buying unit, and 
sales cycle and for gaining an intuitive feel for customer requirements and needs.  Once the data needs are prioritized and initia l expert interviews  are held, conducting 
exploratory customer interviews should be one of the next steps in your market research Expert Interviews
Customer Interviews
Focus Groups
SurveysChoice
ModelingExploratory
ConfirmatoryNote on Market Research E-165    
 p. 7
program.  Typically, ten to twenty interviews per market segment will elicit the vast 
majority of customer needs.1   
 
/G120/G3Focus groups  – Focus groups consist of a collection of potential customers (usually from 
5 to 10), and are typically moderated by a pr ofessional.  They are most effective when 
exploring specific issues and testing reactions , but they can also be helpful in assessing 
the basic need for a product or service, and for generating ideas on segmentation.  As 
with interviews, focus groups can run the risk  of not being representative.  To mitigate 
this risk, focus groups should not be your so le source of information, rather they should 
be used as a form of validation and gaining in sight into other ways of looking at issues 
and customer segments/needs.  Remember, participants will expect to get paid (or otherwise compensated) for their time.  Focus groups can cost between $5,000 and 
$50,000, and take time to assemble .  Because of the costs and the time they take to 
assemble, focus groups are not frequently used  at the business concept and business plan 
development stage.  
 
/G120/G3Surveys  – Surveys are mostly used for validation of need and market characteristics.  It is 
difficult to know which issues to address in  a survey until you have conducted enough 
research to have some understanding of your customers and your market.  When 
conducting surveys, it is important to identif y the right list of questions to ask, to 
understand the representativeness of your response s, and the effect of your response rate.  
Web-based surveys can be easier and cheaper than mail or telephone, but be prepared to 
spend time and money on any survey.  Surveys typically are not used at the concept or business plan stage unless there is an issue where precision is critical to answering a question fundamental to the viability of the bus iness or significantly strengthens the story 
to potential investors.  
 
/G120/G3Choice modeling and concept testing  -- Two other sources of primary data, choice 
modeling and concept testing, tend to be less useful for entrepreneurs at the early stage of 
developing a business strategy because of their narrow applicability.  Entrepreneurs can use these sources for confirmatory work on a critical issue.  These market research 
techniques are targeted towards answerin g specific questions  on product design, 
marketing campaigns, pricing, etc. Choice modeling attempts to answer the question of what product or service attri butes drive the purchase deci sion.  An example of choice 
modeling would be to ask subjects to rank order different permutations of product 
attributes shown on cards or computer screen s, with the primary goal of defining the 
optimal product conf iguration.  Conjoint analysis
2 and direct attribute weighting3 are two 
among several possible methods of utilizing choi ce modeling.    Concept testing is used 
to determine which among a sm all number of variables stimula tes the greatest response.  
A typical use of concept testing would be to  collect data on response rates to different 
                                                 
1 Griffin, Abbie and Hauser, John R.  “The Voice of the Customer.”  Marketing Science .  Winter, 1993. pp. 1-27.  
2 Conjoint analysis is a confirmatory process used to determine the best optimal combination among many 
combinations of feasible or plausible features. 
3 Direct attribute weighting has more exploratory potential than  conjoint analysis and is used to address situations in 
which attributes of an existing product are weighed to find those that are most likely to favorably influence 
customers’ decision process.   Note on Market Research E-165    
 p. 8
product promotions to enable better modeling of the costs of a marketing campaign and 
anticipated revenue gains.     
 
Study Design 
 
Once you have selected your market research tool s, the next step is to design your studies.  
Elements of a design include study objectives, research methods, sample sizes, and subject 
selection criteria.  In entrepreneurial market research, you often will not have the time and resources to gather data that meets strict defi nitions of statistical significance.  You should 
design your studies to facilitate  rapid learning that will enable  you to make judgments about 
your market and business.  Some cons iderations for study design include: 
 
/G131/G3Focus your research on learning about customer  needs, not just reaction to your specific 
concept.  A deeper understanding of the customer can lead to ideas on how to better design your product or service co ncept and your business model. 
  /G131/G3For most industrial and many consumer pr oducts or services, the inter-relationships 
between the buying unit, those who influence the buying unit, and the product or service users can be subtle and complex.  Motiv ations can vary markedly depending on a 
person’s role in the purchase decision and whethe r they expect to be a user.  Your market 
research study should be designed to identify the various buying, influencing, and usage players and their roles, and to highlight their concerns and needs.  
 
/G131/G3Your sample size will need to balance your time and resources with the need to gather 
sufficient data to make critical business judgments.  While the size for surveys can be calculated based on the acceptable level of confidence of the results, there is no such formulaic method for determining the optimal number of interview subjects.  It is 
important to make your sample large enough to ensure you will not have to make business judgments based on individual or a ve ry few number of data points.  Also, be 
sure to collect data from different customer segments, including customers that are at varying points on a potential adoption curve. Samp le size can be an iterative process – if 
you find a lot of consistency in responses earl y on, and there is sufficient variation in the 
type of subjects, you can stop your research on that issue and move on.  Similarly, if there 
is a scatter of input, the sample size may need to be increased or additional market 
research tools used. 
 
Order of research 
 
Your plan for primary data collection should enab le you to reduce uncertainty, within your cost 
and time constraints.  The order of your research is important because what you learn initially 
might change the research you conduct later on.  It is best to start with exploratory tools to build 
a broad base of understanding and then use confir matory tools to gather more exact data on key 
issues.  Starting with secondary research, wh ich consumes less time and resources, will allow 
you to avoid gathering data that others have collected for you and enable you to identify your remaining needs.  Also, starting with secondary data will facilita te narrowing the scope of the 
information you need to collect from primary sources.   Note on Market Research E-165    
 p. 9
 
Once you start primary research data gathering, it is usually best to conduct some interviews 
first, modify your plan based on your learning, and then proceed with additional interviews and 
other primary research studies.  Often the lear ning from initial work enables you to pinpoint 
critical questions where more work is needed an d identify new information needs that were not 
originally anticipated.  Creatin g time lines, budget and resource re quirements will help manage 
these inevitable mid-course adjustments.    
 
STEP 4: C ONDUCT SECONDARY DATA REVIEW AND INITIAL PRIMARY RESEARCH  
 
The two most common components of entreprene urial market research are secondary data 
reviews and customer interviews.  As MBA st udents, you should be familiar with conducting 
secondary research.  You may have less experien ce with market research interviews.  What 
follows are some recommendations for how to gather your secondary and primary interview 
data. 
 
Secondary Data Gathering   
 
Conducting a secondary data review is the most effective way to begin your research.  The 
difficult part often is gaining access to expensive industry reports and data generated by analysts 
that is not widely distributed.  Ways to access secondary sources on a limited budget include:    
 
/G131/G3Utilizing a library that has analyst and industry reports.  
/G131/G3Making calls to industry organizations. 
/G131/G3Conducting competitor website searches and getting copies of competitor literature. 
/G131/G3Finding industry consultant data references  in their own press releases, marketing 
literature and websites as well as in magazine articles. 
/G131/G3Having an industry expert provide you access to reports.  
 
Primary Data Interviews  
 
While conducting a secondary data review is generally straightfo rward, primary research is by 
nature far more difficult.  Customer interviews can be hard to set-up and are time consuming to conduct.  It is easy to introduce biases into your questions and your interpretation of your 
subject’s answers.  There are several practical  considerations that are critical to conducting 
efficient and effective interviews that yield quality results:     
/G131/G3Spend time in advance to develop interview guides so that you are sure to cover key 
issues.  Be willing to deviate from your guide if a key insight can come from it.   
/G131/G3Keep questions simple and focused on criti cal questions – do not overburden subjects 
with overly long or complex interviews.  Ask open-ended questions that encourage subjects to talk.  If you have only yes and no and multiple choice questions, it is difficult for you to gain insights that you did not anticipate when you developed the interview guide. 
/G131/G3Be considerate of subjects’ time.  Few will want to spend more than 30-40 minutes.  Note on Market Research E-165    
 p. 10
/G131/G3If possible, have multiple people particip ate and observe multiple subject groups.  
Different people hear different things in interviews.  
/G131/G3Be careful not to sell the concept during in terviews.  Try to get an honest reaction.  
/G131/G3Start with in-person, local interviews an d test assumptions later with a more 
geographically diverse sample.   
/G131/G3Telephone interviews can sa ve time, but subjects are typically less open on the phone 
than in person.  If you have limited time fo r in-person interviews, do the in-person 
interviews early in your process to gather  broad-based information and then use the 
telephone interviews fo r additional data gath ering and confirmation.  
/G131/G3Develop a standard methodology for evaluating interview responses.  
/G131/G3When reviewing data collected from interviews, identify representative interview 
subjects, and assess biases and experience base  for relevance.  Be aware that thought 
leaders are often earlier on the adoption cu rve and may not be representative of the 
broader customer population.  
 
Additional Practical Considerati ons for Conducting Research 
 
Getting access to potential customers and research subjects, and their agreement to participate, 
can be difficult.  You can induce subjects by re minding them that participating will give them 
several unique opportunities including : learning about a new product or service that may be of 
use, having the ability to influence developmen t of that product or service, and exposure to 
general market intelligence.  Some subjects welcome the change from their normal routine and the opportunity to think more broadly.  You may al so offer to share a summary of the results of 
your research, though be careful not to supply an y individual replies or other info that can be 
traced to specific interview subject s.  Be prepared for many rejections and have a list large pool 
of potential interview candidates.  Wherever possible, use prototypes and visual aids during your research.  Prototypes are particularly important for new concepts and products where the interview subjects will not have an accurate mental picture of what the company would be offering.  It is much easier for people to react to a concept if they see a model or example.  Rapid prototype development can be very helpful for refining your product or service concep t.  Prototypes can also facilitate insights on 
how to change the product in order to expand your  market opportunity.  Exam ples of visual aids 
include screen shots for software products, fl ow chart showing service offering, and plastic 
models of a product. 
 
S
TEPS 5-7: I NTERPRETATION , FURTHER RESEARCH , AND BUSINESS CONCEPT REVISION  
 
Market research data is not a quantitative science for entrepreneur s; rather it provides inputs to 
allow you to make better judgment s.  Tabulation and quan tification is the first step of analysis, 
but for entrepreneurs this is usually only the first step. You will need to apply judgment on what data is representative, how to interpret the data, and in some cases, whether to pay attention to the data at all.  For important issues where the data is unclear, try to “triangulate” by using data gathered from multiple market research sources and by multiple techniques.  Also, try to go back to the understanding you gained from learning about your customer.    Note on Market Research E-165    
 p. 11
Keep in mind that you need to match your results to your segmentation.  Be sure not to 
generalize to entire markets if your results are only applicable to a specific customer subset.  You may need to readjust your segmentation if dictated by the data.  One difficult conflict that can arise is when data from “visionaries” does match data from the broader base of potential customers.  Look at many different differentiatio n and segmentation cuts to glean the most from 
the data.  One of the goals of performing market research  is to develop an understanding of customer 
needs and market dynamics so you can make informed judgments on issues where an analysis of the raw data itself does lead to clear conclusions.  For revolutionary ideas where it is difficult for the market research subjects to fully appr eciate the product value or application, data 
interpretation can be especially difficult.  In these situations, you may need to rely principally on judgments based on your market research- info rmed intuition on likely customer reaction once 
the product is introduced. 
 
Be Willing to Iterate and Modify Your Plans  
The purpose of market research is not to complete the research plan, but to identify ways to 
increase your odds of success, expand your poten tial market, improve yo ur value equation, and 
mitigate risks.  During the course of conducting market research and when it is complete, ask 
yourself what you have learned about the customer need, the fit of your service or product to that 
need, the buying process, the competitive environment, and the market size and projected growth.  Be sure to question your original assumptions in light of the data collected, test the overall viability of the business concept, and modify your offering and strategy in light on the market research results.  Be open to unexpected insights and new directions which will force you to repeat research phases and more importantly, to  change your business direction and plans.  If 
you identify a key insight late in the process that is fundamental to your business, don’t be afraid 
to go back to early participants to validate it. Look for modifications to your business and product concept that would vastly increase your value equation and market size.   
 Market research can be a never-ending process,  but if you begin early you can improve your 
chances of raising capital on more favorable terms by eliminating risk and fine-tuning your business strategy.  Market research is a valuable  tool entrepreneurs can employ to manage the 
allocation of limited time and money towards the pursuit of an increasingly viable strategy.   