CASE#:E-116A
DATE:01/24/2002
(REV’D:09/21/2011)
Research Associate Janet Feldstein prepared this case under the supervision of Professor Garth Saloner, Jeffrey S. Skoll Professor
of Electronic Commerce, Strategic Management, and Economics, as the basis for class discussion rather than to illustrate either
effective or ineffective handling of an administrative situation. This revision was prepared by Arar Han (MBA ’09) under the
supervision of Lecturer Jim Ellis. The revisers gratefully acknowledge Ben Suppe (MBA ’01) for his invaluable assistance.
Copyright © 2002 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University. All rights reserved. To order copies or
request permission to reproduce materials, e-mail the Case Writing Office at: cwo@gsb.stanford.edu or write: Case Writing
Office, Stanford Graduate School of Business, 518 Memorial Way, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-5015. No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, used in a spreadsheet, or transmitted in any form or by any
means –– electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise –– without the permission of the Stanford Graduate
School of Business.
PROJECT SHED (A)
Scott Brady, Dave Leeds, Harpinder "Harpi" Singh Madan, and Eric Botto met at the Stanford
Graduate School of Business (GSB) at the height of the dot-com boom.
Harpi and Dave first met in 1998 as first-year students in Stanford's MBA program. Both came
from operating backgrounds: Harpi was most recently in product development at Oracle and
Dave had come to Stanford from Lexmark, where he led strategic planning for Lexmark's most
profitable business division.
Scott and Eric met a year later in Stanford's year-long Sloan Fellowship program for experienced
executives and managers. Scott had been a co-founder and CTO at two publicly traded software
companies – Clarus and SQL Financials. Eric had undergraduate and master’s degrees from
Stanford in Electrical Engineering and had significant experience leading large engineering
teams at Quantum Corporation and HP Labs.
The four came together as a team during their final quarter at the GSB in the entrepreneurship
class “Formation of New Ventures” ( Exhibit 1 : Founder Profiles). Each of the four had arrived
in Silicon Valley at different times, for different reasons, with different backgrounds; as they
approached graduation, however, all were focused on a common goal of building a substantial
and unique business.
It was spring 2000, and the market’s appetite for entrepreneurship had changed. The NASDAQ
had lost substantial value as the tech "bubble" burst, venture capital was drying up, and fewer
graduates were pursuing start-up opportunities. Nonetheless, each of the founders remained
committed to pursuing an entrepreneurial venture and focused on finding the right opportunity.
Each had a desire, as Harpi put it, “to be part of something meaningful, something that reflected
our values.”ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.2
FORMATION OF THE TEAM
Throughout the spring quarter, the four entrepreneurs challenged one other in class and
recognized in one other an ability to bring a distinct perspective to discussions. They gravitated
toward each other out of interest and respect, developing their partnership through a series of
informal breakfast meetings. Topics of conversation included various themes in leadership, team
formation and business strategy, as well as specific ideas that each entrepreneur was considering.
As the quarter progressed, the idea arose to join forces as the founding team of a start-up
company. The founders saw in one other the potential for a strong alliance built on a variety of
personalities and complementary skills. As Eric put it:
Part of what made our partnership interesting was that everybody had a very
different background and a different perspective. We all brought different skills to
the table. It would have been a lot easier had we picked four people with similar
skills. We probably could have made better progress in the beginning, but I don’t
think we would have made it to where we are today.
After several weeks of consideration, each person’s commitment to a combined effort grew. The
group’s meetings became more structured and targeted toward specific goals. Dave described a
“pivotal discussion” the team had in April 2000:
We met for breakfast at the Peninsula Creamery for a very explicit conversation
around a few key questions: What is it you actually want to do? Do you want to
focus on entrepreneurship? What kind of company do you want to create? Do you
want to create something long term, or to create something to flip it? And finally,
is this the right team?
The four agreed that everyone had a shared vision to build a company with a focus on long-term
value. And so the team was born, adopting the working name ProjectSHED ( Scott, Harpi, Eric
andDave).
Practical Matters
In June 2000, ProjectSHED set up its first ‘office’ in Scott’s on-campus apartment in Stanford’s
Escondido Village. The founders committed to devoting six months to find and begin an
entrepreneurial venture. They also agreed to an equal partnership, with a 100 percent working
time commitment from everyone. In addition, until the company received funding, the
entrepreneurs would work without salary.
The lack of income had a disparate impact on the teammates. Of the four, Scott and Eric were
married and financially secure, with no immediate need for a paycheck. Of the two MBAs, Harpi
was married and Dave was in a committed relationship. Both had student debt and limited
personal resources, and were mindful of the personal opportunity cost of pursuing their
entrepreneurial dream. That said, the team ultimately felt that the experience of pursuing their
dream was worth their time and effort. Eric explained:ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.3
Of course we were taking a big risk. But even if the company didn’t get off the
ground we all felt like the six-month experience would be a great learning
opportunity: how to organize ourselves, clarify our objectives, develop the
business plan, sell it and ourselves effectively to the VC and investing
community, establish valuable relationships and, most importantly, learn from
each other. As long as we were willing to take the personal and financial risks, we
saw this as a no-lose proposition.
The founders made a point of documenting not only the company’s legal aspects, but also the
cultural elements they viewed as critical to a successful venture. Scott explained:
We had all just been in careers that weren’t exactly what we wanted. So given the
fact that this time there would be nobody to blame but ourselves, we had the
mandate to take the time up front to articulate what we wanted that was important
for the company.
The team’s objectives for the company could be broken down into “Whats” as well as “Hows”:
What How
Be challenged Build a High Performance Team
Maximize learning Common goals
Build something special: impactful, long term,
change an industryComplementary skills and experiences
Build unique culture Setting a high bar for the business idea
Shared Core Values
Working Norms
At the outset, the team met each Friday to define and review its work plan for the week, and to
set targets for various points along the project’s six-month timeline. Dave explained:
During the first month we were doing broad theme analysis, so when we hit
Friday, we could look back at the week and it wouldn’t be clear that we’d actually
done anything. We wanted to find a way to measure progress so we wouldn’t feel
like we were spinning our wheels. Sometimes that meant just making sure that we
had a conference scheduled or had set up a specific conversation about an
industry, so we could get to the end of the week and say, “Yes, we met the
objective.” I think that really helped us make forward progress.
Each founder also made an explicit commitment to provide and receive constant, open and
regular feedback within the team. The inspiration came from the GSB class High Performance
Leadership (HPL) that three of the founders had taken together. HPL was an intense ten-week
course offering students insight into and improvement on their leadership and communication
styles. A major component of the course was ongoing participation in a weekly discussion group
called a Skill Development Group (SDG) in which students learned to give and take frank, direct
feedback while executing ongoing group projects. The founders decided to replicate the SDG
experience in their own group. According to Dave:ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.4
From the outset, we’ve been doing SDG-style feedback sessions. Many negatives
as well as positives have come up in these sessions, and I think they have really
helped us deal with potential issues that could have broken the team apart.
Scott recalled that, as the only founder who had not taken HPL, the feedback sessions were “kind
of a rude awakening,” but ultimately a positive experience:
It was amazing for Eric and me, because we had been out in the business world
for so long but had never gotten honest feedback. You know, I had an image of
myself and of what I brought to the table; it turned out to be pretty different from
what these guys saw. But it was a great process because these were people whom
I trusted. Regardless of what happens with the company, we would like to get
better at what we do and we think this is the most effective way to do it.
SEARCHING FOR THE BUSINESS IDEA
From known solutions to unknown problems
The founders’ basic plan was, as Harpi put it: “to become the management team for a group of
world-class technologists.” They started off by identifying opportunities through venture
capitalists, computer science and electrical engineering professors, and others in their personal
networks. Scott explained:
We had a lot of friendly contacts with VCs, so we would have lunch with them
and ask them questions. What made us attractive to them was that we were a team
with the time and ability to do due diligence. They would give us a list of the
companies they were currently evaluating and we’d work with the technologists
and provide a fairly detailed analysis to the VC.
As it turned out, this approach was time-consuming and bore little fruit. The team estimated that
80 percent of its time in the first three months was consumed with due diligence, leaving little
time for original idea generation. Furthermore, VCs were primarily interested in members of the
team as individual executives rather than as founding partners.
Attempting to tap universities for technologists in need of business skills proved equally
difficult. The team soon realized that there was more myth than reality to the stereotype of the
brainy scientist with great ideas but no management know-how. Dave explained:
We had a vision of discovering a new technology being worked on by professors
whom nobody had paid attention to. We expected we could find a diamond in the
rough. But we found that good professors were extraordinarily savvy and that the
engineering guys were already talking to VCs.
As the team looked at existing opportunities, they found themselves increasingly frustrated that
they were always coming “too late to the party.” Promising technological advancements always
seemed to have existing advisors and funding.ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.5
The four decided that looking for cutting-edge technological solutions that could be applied to
existing problems was not the right search plan. According to Scott:
We realized we needed to look for untapped ideas. We had learned that looking
for solutions and then applying them to problems wasn’t going to work because
other teams would already be there doing the work we wanted to do. Looking for
a well-known problem was not a good search either. By the time a problem is
understood, there is someone already working on a solution, even if you don’t
know they are. We needed a problem that wasn’t understood well yet. The
problem could not be too obvious.
Moreover, said Harpi, the team needed solutions that would be important in the future, versus the
present:
We concluded that any business we were looking at now would end up looking
very different two years out. Businesses that obviously made sense already
existed, and it wasn't clear we could develop any sustainable competitive
advantage in those areas. What we needed to do was figure out problems that
weren’t yet obvious so we could devise and deploy a solution a year or two out.
From hitting the books to hitting up conferences
Thus resolved, the team devised a list of criteria for evaluating a business opportunity (see
Exhibit 2 ). They would use the list to vet potential ideas, and also to serve as the benchmark for
what they expected one another to know about an opportunity before pursuing or rejecting it.
The founders decided that with their technical aptitude and diverse backgrounds, many industries
were within their collective reach. Of those, four looked the most promising: storage, optical
networking, internet infrastructure, and wireless. Since they were also four people, the team
adopted a ‘divide and conquer’ strategy; each founder would take one industry to probe in depth
for latent problems, particularly those that could be solved with new technology. They would
continue to convene each week to bring one other up to speed on their research findings (see
Exhibit 3 for a visualization of the search process).
The SHED team began their research by tapping friends in the investment analyst community for
industry studies and by using Stanford’s library resources. Traditional research proved to have
limited use in targeting the next generation of technology in any industry. As Scott explained:
Anything we were reading was already so dated that we couldn’t use it as a
barometer for what was really going to happen. The only way to get a true
perspective on what was happening was to go straight to engineering teams in
high-tech companies. And the only way to do that cost effectively was to catch
them at conferences.
The founders actively sought out “highly technical” conferences with a high density of “nuts-
and-bolts” engineers to tap for information and inspiration. The conferences proved to be gold
mines in both regards. As Scott recalled:ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.6
We would skip all of the keynotes and just spend every minute of every day on
the floor going from booth to booth, talking to the engineers about what made
their jobs hard, or what would make their jobs easier.
As they became more familiar with the industries they researched, the team tried to grasp what
the opportunities were. Their questions evolved, noted Eric: “If what you are doing is successful,
then what is the next bottleneck? What future products and services will be required?”
Pleased with their progress, the team decided to attend more conferences to continue
interviewing other attendees, to kick the tires, and to sleuth around for key technology problems
that would arise in the next several years. Ideally the team would home in on three or four ideas
to pitch to each other, with an ultimate “bakeoff” to decide on one idea.
SELECTING THE BUSINESS IDEA
Over time, the SHED team identified four early-stage problems for which they could create and
sell a technology solution:
Eric learned by talking to his former coworkers that an increasing problem in digital
subscriber line (DSL) network management was “crosstalk,” or the unintended transmission
of data signals across channels. As DSL service providers pushed an ever-increasing volume
of signals through their wires, the signals could become garbled. If SHED could create a
“smart” DSL cable box or retrofit current equipment to tell apart real signals from crosstalk
noise, it could potentially sell the box to DSL providers across the country.
The expected rise in video streaming posed another problem to Harpi: managing the outflow
from a database perspective. Most databases maintained by internet service providers and
companies like Comcast were general purpose and inefficient at handling specialized server
requests like video streaming. If SHED could produce a specialized video database, it could
become the provider of choice for any internet content provider with video inventory.
The proliferation of small electronic media devices led Dave to seriously consider the storage
needs of such devices. There were already substitutes to floppy disks like “thumb” drives, but
they were not robust or capable of high-volume storage, and failure rates were high. If SHED
created an external hard drive optimized to mobile devices, it could be the first to play in the
growing market.
At the 2000 National Fiber Optic Engineering Conference in Denver, Scott and Dave came
across a fourth opportunity. Scott explained:
We started talking to a systems engineer from one of the big telecom equipment
companies. He was explaining his work to us, and we kept pressing him on the
key issues: “Where is it hard? Where do you have a problem? What’s the
bottleneck? What’s the critical path for getting this done?” Finally the guy started
talking about “backhaul” for wireless networks. He had come from the cell tower
industry and he said the biggest problem associated with building wireless
networks had nothing to do with the technology from a wireless perspective. It
wasconnecting the wireless networks back into the existing wired network.ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.7
The pair returned to California and briefed the team on their findings. Harpi remembered, “We
all kept pursuing our individual paths of research, but we kept coming back to that idea.”
The Wireless “Backhaul” Problem
When a mobile handset was in use, a wireless voice or data signal was generated. The signal was
picked up by equipment at a nearby “cell site,” which was typically located on a freestanding
tower or on a building rooftop. The traffic was then transmitted from the wireless carrier’s cell
site back to its mobile switching center (MSC), where it was processed and routed toward its
destination. For example, a voice call might be routed at the MSC to the local phone company,
which would then route it to a telephone. Wireless data might be routed onto the Internet. The
transport of voice and data between the cell site and the MSC was called “backhaul.”
Backhaul was an essential and increasingly strategic component of a wireless carrier’s network.
Multiple factors drove increased demand for backhaul services, including the expected
implementation of third generation (3G) technology, increased usage of high-bandwidth data
applications and voice minutes, and expansion of wireless carriers' geographic coverage.
Major wireless carriers in the United States tended to own or control their MSCs, which were
well connected through high-capacity fiber optic lines to other MSCs, other telecommunications
networks, and the Internet. However, the vast majority of backhaul traffic between cell sites and
MSCs in the United States traveled through a wired infrastructure, typically copper-based T-1
circuits provided by local phone companies.
There were several important problems with the dominant copper T-1 backhaul solution:
Lack of scalability: Each T-1 line could carry only a fixed volume, so there was a limited
amount of capacity in the bundle of copper cables running out to most cell sites. If a wireless
carrier exhausted the existing wired capacity, the local phone companies could lay additional
cable, but at a high fixed cost. With skyrocketing growth in demand for wireless phone
usage,1there was no end in sight to the growth of backhaul.
High cost: A highly competitive market for wireless carriers meant that the service plans
offered to consumers continually offered more and more minutes of use (MOUs) to
customers for the same monthly fee. Unfortunately, as the revenue per MOU continued to
fall, the cost to backhaul each MOU remained constant. This presented an impending gross
margin problem for wireless carriers.
Unreliability: Wired backhaul was operationally the least reliable part of the network. When
a T-1 line failed there was essentially no actionable information available to the wireless
carriers to repair the problem.
Deployment bottleneck: When a wireless carrier wanted to erect a new cell site or lay
additional wire, the lead time required by local phone companies could be measured in
months. This was often the determining factor in how quickly a carrier could turn up new cell
sites.
A Possible Solution
1In addition, the relatively low penetration rate of wireless phones in the United States (compared with Asia and Europe) laid the
expectation of significant ongoing growth in demand.ProjectSHED (A) E-116A
The wireless industry’s issues with wired
could potentially provide a technological solution.
You had a really interesting set of issues happening. The growth in wireless
subscribers was accelerating
demand for backhaul services.
towe r assets. The backhaul networks that were originally provisioned to the tower
couldn’t scale to meet future demand, yet the cost of go
problem was prohibitively high.
The idea was that ProjectSHED
current wired backhaul solution that the
allow wireless carriers to convey signals
centers, entirely bypass ing the existing wired backhaul network
Figure A:
Source: Company records
In short, ProjectSHED’s solution
scalable than the existing solution, and
description of ProjectSHED’s services)
Moving Forward
The SHED team decided to join forces and focus on the backhaul opportunity.
business plan:
The demand for high- speed backhaul, key
the need to build across mu
opportunity…to build and operate a…high
The founders’ next step was to gather
their business. They first built a geographic database
MSCs , tower operators, and wireless carriers
data to produce a “density rate” th
and deploy the envisioned wireless network.
issues with wired backhaul amounted to a problem for which
a technological solution. According to Scott:
You had a really interesting set of issues happening. The growth in wireless
subscribers was accelerating andnew technologies were driving rapid increases in
demand for backhaul services. Anew entrant in the industry had aggregated key
r assets. The backhaul networks that were originally provisioned to the tower
couldn’t scale to meet future demand, yet the cost of go ing back and fixing that
problem was prohibitively high.
ProjectSHED would provide a wireless, microwave- based alternative to the
backhaul solution that the local phone companies provided. This alternative
convey signals from their cell sites directly back to their own switching
ing the existing wired backhaul network (seeFigure A ).
Figure A: The ProjectSHED Network
ProjectSHED’s solution would provide backhaul capacity that was far more reliable and
scalable than the existing solution, and at a lower price (see Exhibit 4
description of ProjectSHED’s services) .
The SHED team decided to join forces and focus on the backhaul opportunity. As stated in
speed backhaul, key structural changes in the industry, and
the need to build across mu ltiple tower portfolios all provide an attractive
opportunity…to build and operate a…high -speed backhaul solution.
The founders’ next step was to gather the intellectual capital that would form the foundation
built a geographic database that included the locations and capacities of
, tower operators, and wireless carriers across the United States. Then, they
data to produce a “density rate” th at quantified the most economically efficient method to design
and deploy the envisioned wireless network.
p.8
a problem for which SHED
You had a really interesting set of issues happening. The growth in wireless
new technologies were driving rapid increases in
new entrant in the industry had aggregated key
r assets. The backhaul networks that were originally provisioned to the tower
ng back and fixing that
based alternative to the
This alternative could
their own switching
that was far more reliable and
for an extended
As stated in their
structural changes in the industry, and
an attractive
form the foundation for
the locations and capacities of
they analyzed the
at quantified the most economically efficient method to design
ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.9
The team determined that none of the major tower companies individually had enough tower
density to impact the backhaul problem of any one major wireless carrier. Two companies’
towers combined, however, passed the hurdle; the combined assets of any two of the major
players made it economically viable to construct a network across the portfolio of assets ( Exhibit
5profiles major tower companies and wireless carriers). ProjectSHED aspired to become the
neutral third party to lead the development of a shared backhaul infrastructure.
Convinced that their idea was structurally viable, the team built a financial model examining the
economics of building their backhaul network. The model established the price points, demand
requirements, and customer deployment hurdles to be met or exceeded to justify a build. The
team also built a detailed blueprint of the network architecture. They evaluated over a dozen
technologies to deploy in the network before ultimately selecting an optimized combination of
tested and proven technologies. These technologies were recognized and promoted as core
company assets.
SELLING THE PLAN TO THE INDUSTRY
Though the team was convinced that they had a feasible concept, they recognized that their plan
depended on their ability to access the real estate where carrier cell sites were located. In order to
deploy their network equipment and connect to the carriers, ProjectSHED needed the
cooperation of the tower operators that owned this real estate. Once achieved, these relationships
would also form a significant barrier to entry for potential competitors.
At the urging of their advisors, the team went to the annual Tower Summit trade show to meet
the key players: top executives from tower operator and service firms, and analysts who served
as industry thought leaders. Convincing the tower operators to sign on with ProjectSHED was a
major challenge. As Scott explained:
The CEOs in the tower industry were entrepreneurs who had built companies with
multibillion dollar market caps in just three to four years. When we pitched to
them, we learned that each of the companies had their own perspective on solving
the backhaul problem. We had to do significant education about density and show
them why an independent entity could do it better and more economically, and
would be more favored by a carrier. In retrospect, they all liked the concept; they
just didn’t like the idea of working with their competitors.
The tower companies also questioned the notion that industry “outsiders” like ProjectSHED
could get the job done. The tower industry executives told them, “You guys are really smart. But
you’re not from the industry, so why you?”
Even when the tower companies became convinced of the idea’s merit, they tended to want the
SHED team to come on board as employees and develop a company-owned solution. The
founders were firmly opposed to the idea of being absorbed into a large company. They
continued to believe that a neutral third party was critical to building out a backhaul solution
across networks and geographies.ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.10
As time wore on without a clear path to execution, self funding was draining the team’s
emotional and financial resources. The MBAs in particular felt the anxiety of being a few months
out of school with neither an income nor a secure career plan. Harpi explained:
At this time, Dave and I felt like if we didn’t make at least a thousand dollars a
month, our significant others were going to kick us out. We had been operating
without salaries for four or five months, and we weren’t independently wealthy.
At a crossroads, the four founders pondered their options: Should they continue with their data
backhaul idea or search for an easier business to launch? Another idea was to have the founders
with greater resources fund the project going forward. The team wondered for how long and at
what price this would stay a viable option. As they discussed the forward course, a deeper, more
unsettling question remained: Had the SHED team’s approach to entrepreneurship run its course?ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.11
Exhibit 1
ProjectSHED Founder Profiles
Scott Brady, Cofounder and CEO
Experience
13 years of general management and technology experience
Clarus Corporation (NASDAQ:CLRS) : Cofounder and CTO
SQL Financials International (NASDAQ:SQLF) : Cofounder and CTO
Andersen Consulting : complex strategic planning and technology deployment
Education
Stanford Graduate School of Business: MS in Management (Sloan Fellow)
University of Florida: BSBA in Finance (high honors)
Eric Botto, Cofounder and VP Engineering
Experience
15 years of product development, engineering management, and general management
experience
Quantum Corporation : Engineering Program Manager, led 64 engineers and 7
engineering managers. Responsible for $20mm budget and $500mm revenues.
Quantum, Plus Development, and HP Labs : R&D Engineer
Education
Stanford Graduate School of Business: MS in Management (Sloan Fellow)
Stanford University: MS and BS, Electrical Engineering
David M. Leeds. Cofounder and VP Marketing
Experience
8 years of worldwide operations and strategic planning experience
Lexmark International : responsible for $200mm high-end printer supplies business
TwoLeeds : founder, operations consulting company in Southern China
Education
Stanford Graduate School of Business: MBA
University of Vermont, University of Copenhagen: BSBA, International Finance (honors)
Harpinder Madan, Cofounder and VP Business Development and Strategic Alliances
Experience
6 years of technical, team-building, sales, and operations experience
Oracle Corporation and Bull-Honeywell : Product Development Lead
Think Business Networks : cofounder and CTO
Doll Capital Management : Venture Associate for $1bn telecom VC fund
Education
Stanford Graduate School of Business: MBA
Indiana University, Bloomington: MS, Computer Science (honors)
Institute of Technology, BHU, India: BS, Computer Science (President’s Gold Medal for
graduating #1 in university)
Source: Company recordsProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.12
Exhibit 2
Opportunity Evaluation Criteria
Sample
Idea
Opportunity Rate each criterion on a scale of 1-10, with 10 being best.
1 Year 5 revenue potential in excess of $50mm5
2 Defensible business with solid barriers to entry8
3 Poor availability of direct substitutes6
4 High-growth market in excess of GDP growth8
5 Solve a problem 2 years out; solve a durable problem9
6 Solve an innovation problem or drive improvement (vs. being fundamental
breakthrough) 9
7 Exit possible in 5 years4
8 IP, Quantitative, and/or Analysis heavy10
9 Business aligns with either technology background or functional expertise of team5
10 Passion for opportunity8
Team Decide yes or no.
1 SHED member able and willing to serve as CEOYes
2 No single investor owns greater than 49%Yes
3 Business we can found and build out of West CoastNo
4 Proud parent test: happy to tell others, reputation of likely staff in industry good, ease
of transition to next opportunity Y/N/Y
Other Rate each criterion on a scale of 1-10, with 10 being best.
1 Not too many externalities out of our control3
2 Likely to be funded based on comparative deals in industry and informal consultation
with likely funders6
Total Sum all of the above numeric ratings.81
Gut check Is it fun, fundable, and on the right trajectory?
Source: Company recordsProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.13
Exhibit 3
Visualization of SHED Search Process
Overview
Industry and Idea Selection
Source: Corey Ford of Runway at Innovation Endeavors (used with permission).
ProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.14
Exhibit 4
ProjectSHED Info Sheet
Who is ProjectSHED?
ProjectSHED has brought together experts in wireless design and deployment, network management, and general management to
focus specifically on improving the weaknesses in the backhaul portion of wireless networks.
The ProjectSHED solution is a cost effective, high capacity, shared infrastructure that employs a unique combination of microwave
and fiber to directly lower operating expenses, enhance revenue generating capability and increase overall operating efficiencies.
From its inception, the company has worked intimately with wireless operators to clearly understand customer and quality
requirements. The result is a well architected custom-made solution that will meet demanding carrier metrics.
What are the weaknesses in backhaul today?
Wireless operators express significant frustration with today's backhaul infrastructure. Greater than 25% of operating budgets are
spent on provisioning and maintaining backhaul, provisioning times are painfully slow leading to delayed time to market, legacy
networks are unreliable, and customer service from T1 vendors has reached an unacceptable level. Operators are no longer able to
move forward effectively, and are uncertain how the current infrastructure will support increased capacity and data needs in the
future.
What does ProjectSHED do?
ProjectSHED has designed and created a network consisting of high capacity point to point microwave, existing redundant fiber
rings, and a robust operations and network management suite. ProjectSHED's technology is designed to support existing voice
applications and address future data needs.
ProjectSHED's network bypasses the existing copper local loop infrastructure by implementing a scalable wireless system. The
company is custom engineering this network in selected markets from the ground up, incorporating local engineering requirements
and insuring high end to end network reliability. All design and maintenance is done by ProjectSHED, minimizing response and
repair time for customer service issues.
What are the advantages of the ProjectSHED solution?
Reduces total cost of backhaul through a simplified, shared backhaul infrastructure that benefits from wireless operator
collocation
Provides increased reliability through network designed and built with proven microwave and fiber optic technologies
Reduces long provisioning time by providing pre-provisioned circuits
Offers quantifiable improvements in customer service by eliminating legacy systems, simplifying processes, and implementing
proactive customer management
Why ProjectSHED?
ProjectSHED believes there is a fundamental need for change in the backhaul network, The team consists of wireless industry
experts with a proven track record of success. The ProjectSHED team has had specific experience designing, building, managing
and maintaining cellular and PCS networks. Team members have built, operated, and maintained the largest microwave backhaul
networks in North America. ProjectSHED is funded and advised by leading architects, industry veterans and influencers in the
wireless industry.
@ 2002 ProjectSHED Corporation, All Rights Reserved
Source: Company recordsProjectSHED (A) E-116A p.15
Exhibit 5
Profiles of Key Partners and Customers
Tower Operators *
($ ‘000)American
TowerCrown Castle SpectraSite
Ticker AMT CCI SITE
Towers Owned 12,846 14,435 7,550
Stock Price $8.80 $10.89 $3.03
Market Capitalization $1,739 $2,364 $510
2001E Revenues $1,111 $874 $490
* Current as of 11/30/01
Wireless Carriers**
($ ‘000)AT&T
WirelessSprint PCS Nextel
Ticker AWE PCS NXTL
# Subscribers 18,064 13,729 8,656
Stock Price $17.31 $20.44 $24.75
Market Capitalization $33,856 $24,427 $8,262
2001E Revenues $13,642 $9,751 $6,996
** Current as of 12/21/01
Source: Company records