www.hbrreprints.org 
The Sales Learning 
Curve 
by Mark Leslie and Charles A. Holloway 
Included with this full-text  
Harvard Busine ss Review 
 article:
The Idea in Brief— the core idea
The Idea in Practice— puttin g the idea to work 
1 
Article Summary 
2 
The Sales Learning Curve
A list of related materials, with annotations to guide further
exploration of the article’s ideas and applications 
11 
Further Reading 
Because new-product 
launches often take lo nger 
and cost more than expected, 
many promising offerings are prematurel y aborted. Smart 
companies give themselves time and mone y enough to 
climb th e sales learning curve 
before ramping up the sales force. 
Reprint R0607J
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
page 1 
The Idea in Brief The Idea in Practice COPYRIGHT © 2006 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
When your company launches a new prod-
uct, do you rush to beef up your sales force capacity? If so, consider the dangers of this impulse: most new products aren’t quite ready for prime time, because they don’t 
have the features consumers want—or they don’t yet work the way they should. So selling them becomes an uphill battle: you burn through cash only to generate disap-pointing revenues.
How to avoid this scenario? Give your com-
pany time to climb the  
sales learning 
curve 
—finding out how early customers 
acquire and use your new offering and then modifying your product and sales tactics based on what you’ve learned.
In particular, Leslie and Holloway recom-
mend matching your sales force’s size and skills to where you’re situated on the sales learning curve. For example, after beta-testing the product, assign just a few sales-
people to learn as much as they can about customers’ response to your product. Use these insights to perfect the offering and your go-to-market strategy. Expand your 
sales force only after you see sales acceler-ate.
By taking time to climb the sales learning 
curve, you start generating profits on your new offering sooner—and you sweeten the odds of scoring a success in the marketplace.To climb the sales learning curve, the authors 
suggest these steps:
 
UNDERSTAND NEW-PRODUCT SALES 
CHALLENGES 
In launching any new offering, you’ll face nu-
merous challenges—including identifying and resolving service issues and developing a repeatable sales model. Adding sales capacity 
too early in the launch prevents you from ad-
dressing these challenges.
Example: 
Software maker Scalix developed a Linux-
based e-mail system that initially garnered enthusiastic responses from CIOs. Scalix ex-panded its sales force quickly and moved to sell directly to CIOs at large companies. But it encountered several problems. CIOs weren’t the primary decision makers on e-
mail systems. IT department managers were—and they didn’t want the headache 
of switching to Linux. Moreover, the prod-uct needed further trials with customers to function properly. Scalix revised its sales ap-proach—but wasted scarce resources in the meantime. 
ADJUST YOUR SALES STRATEGY AS YOU 
LEARN 
The sales learning process unfolds in three 
phases—each requiring a different size sales force with different skills: 
1. Initiation: 
 You’ve beta-tested the product 
and have few potential customers. Hire three to four salespeople to learn how customers 
will use the product and to support other parts of the company in refining the offering as well as marketing and selling strategies. Look for salespeople who: 
• 
Communicate well with teams from other 
functions 
• 
Tolerate ambiguity 
• 
Have a deep interest in product technology 
• 
Can bring customers together with various 
functional teams in your firm 
• 
Can develop their own sales models and 
collateral materials
Example: 
Scalix’s overhauled sales strategy involved 
hitting the Linux evangelist and early adopter community first, with particular emphasis on smaller targets in the higher education and public sectors (where Linux acceptance was strongest). It hired two in-house telesales reps to drum up leads. With lower-priced salespeople and a com-pressed sales cycle, the new model offered much better economics than the original approach. And in 2004 and 2005, Scalix was named one of  
Red Herring 
’s 100 top private 
companies of North America. 
2. Transition: 
 You’ve acquired a critical mass of 
customers, and sales are accelerating. Keep your initial sales team focused on learning. 
Add sales reps who can operate effectively 
within an evolving sales model but who don’t necessarily have the analytical and communi-cation skills the initial team required. 
3. Execution: 
 You’ve developed your formula 
for success and put your sales force’s support 
requirements in place. Now bring in tradi-
tional salespeople—and arm them with a ter-ritory, sales plan, price book, and marketing 
materials to take orders.
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning 
Curve 
by Mark Leslie and Charles A. Holloway 
harvard business review • july–august 2006 page 2 COPYRIGHT © 2006 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Because new-product launches often take longer and cost more than 
expected, many promising offerings are prematurely aborted. Smart comp anies gi ve themselves time and money enough to climb the sales 
learning curve before ramping up the sales force. 
When a company launches a new product, the
temptation is to immediately ramp up salesforce capacity to acquire customers as quickly
as possible. Yet in our 25 years of experiencewith start-ups and new-product introductions,we’ve found that hiring a full sales force toofast just leads the company to burn through
cash and fail to meet revenue expectations.
Before it can sell the product efﬁciently, the
entire organization needs to learn how cus-tomers will acquire and use it, a process wecall the sales learning curve.
The concept of a learning curve is well un-
derstood in manufacturing. Employees trans-fer knowledge and experience back and forth
between a production line and the purchasing,
manufacturing, engineering, planning, and op-erations departments. Over time, the entireprocess becomes more effective: The moretimes a process is repeated, the more efﬁcientit becomes and the lower its cost.
Start-ups and existing companies launching
new products follow a sales learning curvethat’s analogous to the manufacturing learningcurve but one that unfolds through the give-
and-take between the company and its custom-ers. As customers adopt and use the product,the organization modiﬁes both the offeringand the processes associated with making andselling it. (See the exhibit “Learning Processesfor Manufacturing and Sales. ”) A large sales
staff hinders more than it helps a companyclimb the curve. Instead of following conven-tional sales wisdom, the ﬁrm should focus ﬁrston organizing itself so it can learn from cus-tomers and respond to them.
It’s important not to confuse the organiza-
tion’s sales learning curve with a salesperson’sindividual learning curve. Most companies ex-pect sales reps to go from new employees tofully productive salespeople during their ﬁrstmonths on the job, as they learn more aboutthe product, the customers, the market, andthe competition. The sales learning curve weare describing is separate from, and indepen-dent of, the individual learning curve andmore comprehensive, involving all customer-facing parts of the organization: marketing,
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
harvard business review • july–august 2006 page 3 
sales, product support, and product develop-
ment. The improvements in sales yield that re-sult from this organizational learning processaffect all of the sales representatives, both newand experienced.
In this article, we will look at the sales learn-
ing curve as a framework for helping managersand investors develop thoughtful launchstrategies, plan resource allocation more accu-
rately, set appropriate expectations, avoid di-
sastrous c ash shortfalls, and reduce both the
time and money required to achieve a proﬁt.But ﬁrst, let’s consider some of the unexpectedproblems start-ups and established companiesrun into when they launch a new product—problems that could be anticipated if the salesfunction were viewed as a learning process. 
The New-Product Sales Challenge 
Twenty-ﬁve years ago, the major risk in creat-
ing a company (or in launching a brand newproduct from an established company) wasthe feasibility of the technology. Managersbelieved: “If we can build it, they will come. ”
Today, the product development cycle is
more predictable, thanks to the greater avail-ability of subcomponents and robust devel-opment tools. So the biggest risk for mostcompanies has shifted from getting the prod-
uct to work to getting it to market. Entrepre-neurs increasingly must ask: “When we buildit, will they come?”
But if start-ups apply conventional sales
wisdom to new-product launches and add sales
capacity too quickly, the result is often disap-
pointing revenue growth and a cash shortfall.
(For an example of how that works, see thesidebar “How Big a Sales Force?”) That’s be-cause the conventional wisdom fails to address
a number of challenges involved in creatingmarkets for unfamiliar products: the time re-quired to educate customers about the offeringand learn how they will use it, the inevitabledesign modiﬁcations needed to deliver a ro-bust product that will fully satisfy customers,the identiﬁcation and resolution of service is-sues, the development of a repeatable salesmodel, the selection of appropriate marketpositioning, and the design of effective sales in-
centives. Here’s a case in point. 
Midcourse correction at a start-up.  
Scalix, a
software company that develops e-mail andcalendaring programs hosted on Linux, is one
start-up that struggled to get its sales modelright. The company’s founders recognized
that the underlying infrastructure of market-leading e-mail systems such as Microsoft Ex-change was originally designed for workgroups and had never been upgraded to efﬁ-ciently support large organizations. They be-lieved that the disruptive nature of the Linuxoperating system created a rare opportunityfor a new supplier to enter the mature e-mail
market with a solution that was more secure,reliable, scalable, and cost effective. Speciﬁ-
cally, they aimed to cut total cost of ownership
by 50% to 60%.
Scalix launched its product, based on
Hewlett-Packard’s OpenMail system, in July2003. In early interviews, CIOs responded en-thusiastically to the promised cost savings, sothe company decided to expand its sales capac-ity quickly. Its initial strategy was simple: Re-cruit a high-powered sales leader with enter-prise experience and sell directly to CIOs atlarge companies.
However, as Scalix moved deeper into the
sales cycle at large corporations, the companyencountered a number of unexpected prob-lems. First, it became evident that the CIO wasnot the primary decision maker for purchasinge-mail systems. In many cases, the operationsteam one level down—the people who wouldbe responsible for keeping the system up and
running on a daily basis—rejected Scalix’s solu-tion. These department managers didn’t wantthe headache of moving their Windows-basedExchange administrators over to Linux. Andthe Exchange administrators themselves viewed
moving to Scalix as a career detour.
The second problem was closely related to
the ﬁrst. Scalix discovered that many largecompanies needed to get more comfortable
with Linux before they would run e-mail on it.While a small group of people trained onLinux existed in most organizations in Scalix’ssales pipeline, they were not working on e-mail. Early adopters, such as Amazon andeBay, were running only customer-facing appli-cations on Linux.
The third problem was of an entirely differ-
ent order and perhaps the thorniest. Scalixlearned its product was not quite ready forprime time. CEO Glenn Winokur explained:“You come out, and you think you have a market-ready product. Then you discover that you re-
ally don’t. You’re 90% of the way there, butthere’s another 10% you have to iterate on with  
Mark Leslie 
 (mleslie@leslieventures
.com ) is the managing director of the 
private investment company Leslie Ven-tures; a lecturer at Stanford Graduate School of Business and Stanford’s Grad-uate School of Engineering; and the re-tired founder, chairman, and CEO of Veritas Software. He is based in Portola 
Valley, California.  
Charles A. Holloway 
 
(holloway_chuck@gsb.stanford.edu
) is 
the Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers Professor of Management, Emeritus at 
Stanford Graduate School of Business in 
California.
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
harvard business review • july–august 2006 page 4 
How Bi g a Sales Force? 
At the time of a successful beta test, 
young companies typically carry a large ﬁxed cost, consisting of engi-neer ing and G&A personnel. In an ef-
fort to cover those costs and become 
cash positive as quickly as possible, 
they want to ramp up sales quickly. Conventional wisdom suggests that 
the only way to drive sales is by hiring sales reps as early as possible. To ﬁg-ure out exac tly how many reps to hire 
and when, most sales leaders use a 
capacity-planning model.
The basic formula for calculating the 
number of salespeople needed to reach the break-even cash ﬂow point is to di-vide the total ﬁxed costs by the mar-ginal contribution of an average sales rep (revenue minus cost of goods sold 
minus total cost per rep). The ﬁrst step is to calculate total cost per rep.
Say a software company pays its aver-
age sales rep $200,000 per year (base plus commission), and a sales rep in-curs $50,000 per year in T&E expenses plus $80,000 in administrative and op-erating expenses. That totals $330,000 in direct costs per rep. To that must be added indirect costs (such as sales sup-port and management personnel), 
which typically adds as much as 50% of the direct cost per rep, in this case $165,000. That brings the total cost per rep to $495,000 per year.
The next, and most challenging, step 
is to ﬁgure out what annual revenue it’s reasonable to expect an average rep to produce once she’s come fully 
up to speed—the “standard quota. ” To do so, most sales leaders rely on their past experience or the experience of other salespeople selling similar prod-ucts. That works ﬁne for mature prod-
ucts. Suppose, for instance, that our software company hires a star sales vice president from a 
 
Fortune 
 100 soft-
ware ﬁrm. Based on his previous expe-rience, he might expect a fully effective sales rep (FESR) to produce about $2.5 million in revenue per year, and so that’s the ﬁgure he starts with as the standard quota.
Then to account for attrition and 
uneven performance among reps, he 
prudently reduces that ﬁgure by about 20% to $2 million in average revenue per rep. The software busi-
ness has high incremental margins of around 90%, yielding an expected contribution of $1.8 million per rep. 
So, subtracting the total cost per rep of $495,000 from the expected yield, the sales VP arrives at a marginal con-tribution for an average rep of around $1.3 million per year.
Our company’s ﬁxed costs (engi-
neering and G&A) are running around $12 million per year, so the sales head concludes that he needs about nine or 
ten sales reps to reach the break-even point. He’d get these reps on board as 
soon as possible and promise execu-tive management that they’d reach break-even within six to 12 months, the typical time required to train and de-
ploy new sales reps.
But let’s say that our company is a 
start-up, and the sales VP , in an effort to be conservative about selling a tot ally 
new product in a new market, reduces his standard quota from $2.5 million to $1.5 million. That drops the mar-ginal contribution per rep to $585,000. Plugging in this lower mar-ginal contribution would lead him to con-
clude he needs more like 21 sales reps.
The problem with applying the 
above methodology to start-ups or new-category product launches, though, is that it doesn’t take into ac-count the organization’s sales learning 
curve. Our start-up would be swamped if all 21 reps were hired from the out-set, when the product was still being reﬁned, the go-to-market strategy had 
yet to be settled, and revenues were 
coming in far more slowly than they 
ever would for a mature product. Cash 
ﬂow would be strained, sending the company further into the red and dis-
appointing investors.
So what’s the right way to approach 
capacity planning for a new-product 
launch? Start out with very low as-sumptions about expected revenue per salesperson, and increase these expec-tations gradually, quarter by quarter. 
Anticipate that during the initiation phase, reps will not generate enough revenue to cover their total costs. 
Given that the marginal contribution per rep will therefore be negative in 
this phase, hiring more people will merely deteriorate your cash position. Only when you see the productivity of existing reps approaching the point 
where they cover their total costs should you consider expanding the sales force. Unfortunately, there’s no magic formula for predicting when that point will arrive. But closely track-ing your sales yield, and tying your planning assumptions to the different stages on the sales learning curve, will prevent you from wasting critical funds in the early stages.
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
harvard business review • july–august 2006 page 5 
customers. From the time we came out and
through all of 2003, we iteratively worked onpilots and trials with customers and learnedthe full extent of customers’ requirements forenterprise-class e-mail. ”
Scalix faced such an uphill battle selling di-
rectly to large enterprises that after a few sales
to small public sector accounts, the companycorrected its course. In mid-2004, it overhauled
its go-to-market strategy to hit the Linux evan-gelist and early adopter community ﬁrst, witha particular emphasis on smaller targets in thehigher education and public sectors, whereLinux acceptance was strongest. To executethis new strategy, Scalix hired two in-housetelesales representatives to drum up leads.With lower-priced salespeople and a com-
pressed sales cycle, the new model offeredmuch better economics than the original ﬁeldsales approach. The revised sales strategy isworking well. Scalix was named one of  
Red
Herring 
’s 100 top private companies of North
America in 2004 and 2005.
Such adjustments aren’t unusual when com-
panies interact with real customers deployinga product to do real work and in the process
learn how to better meet their customers’needs. But Scalix could have saved scarce re-sources and learned important lessons farmore quickly had it delayed hiring a traditionalsales force and focused all customer-facing de-partments on learning from the beginning. 
Breaking new ground at an established
company.  
Established companies often make
many of the same mistakes in launching a newproduct that start-ups do. They hire experi-enced sales talent far enough in advance of thelaunch to allow them to come up to speed(based on conventional sales wisdom), andthen they sit back and wait for the sales teammembers to deliver their expected quotas.
In late 2001, Veritas Software, now part of
Symantec, was a large software company thatsold three major software products through aninternational sales force of more than 2,000ﬁeld employees. It was very good at selling suc-cessive releases of its existing products, but the
company’s track record in new categories was
spottier. Although its signature ﬁle and diskmanagement software was competitive in its 
Lear ning Processes for Manufacturing and Sales 
An innovative product does not arise fully 
formed from a ﬂawless development pro-cess. It emerges from the give-and-take 
between all the departments involved in its creation—purchasing, manufactur-
ing, engineering, operations, planning, and the factory ﬂoor. The same is true for the sales strategy that will bring that product to market. It, too, is an iterative 
process, one that involves all the depart-ments that face customers.
PRODUCT
Manufacturing Learning Sales LearningPurchasing
Manufactur
ing
Man ufacturing EngineeringProduct E ngineering
Operations
PlanningMarketing
Product Management
Product Marketing
Product SupportProduct Engineering
Sales Engineer
ingSalesCUSTOM
ERFRONTIERPRODUCTIONFRONTIERProduction 
Line 1 Customer 1
Customer 2
Customer 3
Customer 4Production 
Line 2
Production 
Line 3
Production 
Line 4
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
harvard business review • july–august 2006 page 6 
features, many customers preferred a bundled
hardware and software solution like thosefrom EMC and Network Appliance. So Veritasdecided to launch a new class of products, a setof software applications preconﬁgured to runon servers from vendors like Dell, Compaq,HP , and IBM. This bundled solution wouldoffer the cost advantages of buying commodityPC server hardware from existing vendors to-gether with a complete plug-and-play softwarepackage from Veritas.
The company’s initial go-to-market strategy
was to create an overlap sales force thatwould work closely with the regular softwaresales force. Both sales teams received commis-sions on the new product. However, a numberof problems arose shortly after the launch.Veritas had expected the product to be com-
pletely developed and ready to go, but it wasnot yet either fully reliable or fully func-tional. This frustrated the regular sales team,which was used to selling mature products.Reps were compensated for sales of the new
product but not enough to make up for theextra time and effort required. In addition,
the new bundled offering was seen as a poten-tial threat to the company’s traditional hard-ware partners like Sun Microsystems, making
them less likely to cooperate with Veritas atthe ﬁeld sales level. Understandably, savvyregular salespeople never enthusiastically sup-
ported the new product. Veritas aban doned the
initiative a little over a year after its introduc-tion because the revenue remained substan-tially below expectations.
Had Veritas better understood what was in-
volved in the sales learning curve for this new
venture, it could have anticipated and made
provisions for these problems.
 
What the Organization Needs to 
Learn 
Every business goes through a unique learning
process, and each industry, company, andproduct has a different set of drivers. As theScalix and Veritas examples show, the productwill probably not have exactly the right fea-tures or work exactly the way it should at theoutset. The sales and marketing processes maynot be focused initially on the right customers.To traverse the learning curve, product devel-
opment, marketing, and sales must resolve ahost of complicated questions. The productdevelopers, for instance, need to correctly de- 
What Goes in to a Comprehensive New-Product Strategy 
Launching a completely new product into a 
new market is not just a matter of hiring an army of salespeople and letting them loose 
once the product is created. Product develop-ers, marketers, and sales staff need to resolve 
a host of issues:
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
Completeness
>Features and functions
>Interface to existing ecosystem
>Ease of installation
Correctness
>Value to customers
>Reliability
>Ease of servicing 
Fit
> Ease of use
> Suitability for environmentMARKETING
Positioning
>Competitive analysis
>Market segmentation
>Marketing messages
>Proof of value proposition (ROI)
>Pack aging
Promotion
>Collateral materials
>Advertising, shows, and PR
>Customer testimonials
Pricing
>Across market segments
>Across channelsSALES 
Distribution Channels
>Number and type
>Channel support and training 
Sales Force
>Sales model
>Sales pitch
>Training and development
>Lead generation
>Technical support
Sales Stage
>Learning
>Development
>Expansion
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
harvard business review • july–august 2006 page 7 
termine which features would make the prod-
uct valuable to customers. They need to makeit easy to use, reliable, and efﬁcient to service.Marketers need to correctly analyze the prod-uct’s position relative to its competition. Theyneed to segment its market. They need to de-velop packaging. The sales team needs to de-
termine the number and type of distributionchannels, develop a sales model, work up asales pitch. The broad range of issues that allthree departments must resolve to launch asuccessful product is summarized in the ex-hibit “What Goes into a Comprehensive New-Product Strategy. ” When you look at thelength of the list, it becomes easy to see thatlaunching a new product involves far morethan ramping up a large sales force.
Gaining that knowledge, of course, doesn’t
happen all at once. Nor does it happen in avacuum. It develops gradually: The companymakes initial assumptions, which are modiﬁed
iteratively as feedback comes in from early cus-tomers. The modiﬁed offering reaches evenmore customers, whose further feedbackhones the product, the message, and the salesefforts—accelerating the company’s progressalong the learning curve. This process cannotbe short-circuited by sending out an army of
salespeople in an effort to gather more feed-back more quickly: Many problems are discov-ered sequentially, revealing themselves onlyafter some preceding issue has been discoveredand addressed. Eventually, the company learnsenough to reach a level of steady sales.
 
The Sales Learning Curve 
Companies have long measured their progress
along the manufacturing learning curve bytracking costs per unit—the more they learnabout the manufacturing process, the more ef- 
How St eep a Curve? 
Progress along the sales learning curve is measured by tracking sales 
yield over time. As you might expect, the curve for launching a totally new product into a new market is much longer and ﬂatter initially than one for introducing a variation of an existing product into an es-tablished market. Clearly, the longer the learning curve, the greater 
the revenue gap—that is, the longer it takes for sales yield to reach targeted quota levels. Setting expectations appropriately, therefore, 
can make the difference between pioneering a new market and abort-
ing too soon.
TIMESALES YIELDRevenue GapStandard 
Quota
TIMESALES YIELDRevenue 
GapStandard 
QuotaNew Product, New Market
Follow-On Product, Existing Market
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
harvard business review • july–august 2006 page 8 
ﬁcient it becomes, and the lower the unit cost
goes. Progress along the sales learning curve ismeasured in an analogous way: The more acompany learns about its product, market,
and sales process, the more efﬁcient it be-comes at selling, and the higher the sales yield.
“Sales yield” is deﬁned as the average annualsales revenue per full-time, fully trained andeffective sales representative. Typically, salesyield for a new product starts out slowly, accel-erates for a while, and then ﬂattens out as theproduct matures, in a classic S-shape curve.
The steepness of the curve—a measure of
how rapidly product revenues reach the break-even point and then achieve targeted levels—
varies substantially from product to product.
For example, when the Palm Pilot was intro-
duced, it created a whole new product cate-gory. The sales learning process was long andcomplicated, resulting in a sales yield curve
that looked like the ﬁrst curve in the exhibit“How Steep a Curve?” By contrast, the com-peting Handspring, a follow-on product in anow-established market, was launched with a“better, faster, cheaper” strategy, and its learn-ing process was far quicker. Accordingly, its
sales curve is shifted to the left and far steeper,resembling the second curve in the exhibit. For
many new-product launches, the sales yieldnever reaches expected levels, or even thebreak-even point, resulting in cash shortfallsand premature death for promising products.
Tracking sales yield can be more challenging
than measuring manufacturing productionvolumes and costs because revenue-generating
activities tend to be less predictable than pro-duction. Still, applying the concept of a saleslearning curve allows you to understand wherein the learning process your launch is, so thatyou can deploy your sales force, marketing ef-
forts, engineering support, and management
time appropriately. 
Sales Force Planning for Launch 
The way to shift the sales learning curve to the
left, and reach the break-even point and prof-itability more quickly, is to track sales yieldover time and adjust your go-to-market strat-
egy as you move along the curve. That’s be-cause the sales learning process unfolds in
three distinct phases—the initiation phase,the transition phase, and the executionphase—as the exhibit “Ramping Up the Learn-ing Curve” shows. Each phase requires a differ-ent size—and kind—of sales force, and repre-sents a different stage in your production,marketing, and sales strategies. The gatewaysfrom one stage to the next correspond to twomarkers of proﬁtability level—the break-evenpoint and some targeted level of steady sales,
which we call the “traction point. ” 
The initiation phase.  
This phase begins
when the product is ready to hit the market,that is, when it has been beta tested, and lastsuntil the break-even point—that is, whensales yield reaches a point where revenue persales rep equals the fully loaded cost per salesrep. Typically, during this time, few custom-
ers will be willing to consider buying theproduct, and those that do will require sig-nificant incentives.
It’s both unrealistic and potentially dysfunc-
tional to assign large sales quotas in the initia-tion phase. The members of the sales teamshould be encouraged to focus instead onlearning as much as they can about how cus-tomers will use the product so they can sup-port engineering, product marketing, and mar-
keting communications in perfecting both the 
Ramping Up the Learning Curve 
The go-to-market strategy for a new 
product should unfold in three parts. 
The stafﬁng and ﬁnancial resources 
needed in the ﬁrst stage, before the product is proﬁtable, are very different from those needed in the second stage, when the product is being reﬁned, and 
different again from those needed after 
most issues have been resolved and 
sales have reached a sustainable, pre-dictable level.SALES YIELDInitiation 
PhaseTransition 
PhaseExecution 
Phase
TIMEBreak-even pointTrac tion point
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
harvard business review • july–august 2006 page 9 
offering itself and the go-to-market strategy
and programs. A heavily commission-basedpay plan is not only unlikely to achieve salesobjectives but can inhibit learning.
It’s also inefﬁcient to hire too many sales
reps in this phase. A small sales force not only
keeps costs down but is more effective in sup-
porting other parts of the company. Typically,
three to four salespeople are enough to startthe learning process and to make sure thatthe problems encountered aren’t just the re-sult of a bad hire.
The types of skills needed during this phase
differ from those needed to sell more matureproducts. They include a facility for communi-cating with many parts of the organization, a
tolerance of ambiguity, a deep interest in theproduct technology, and a talent for bringingcustomers together with various functionalteams within the company. Salespeople mustbe resourceful, able to develop their own
sales models and collateral materials asneeded. We think of this kind of person as the“renaissance rep. ” 
The transition phase.  
Toward the end of the
initiation phase, companies generally have ac-quired a critical mass of customers, and salesare beginning to accelerate. Once the sales yieldequals the fully loaded expense per sales rep,it’s safe to assume you’ve moved into the transi-tion phase. This second phase lasts until thesales yield reaches a point where companymanagement can see that the product hasachieved real traction in the market.
What constitutes “traction” varies from com-
pany to company and product to product. Still,we’ve found that a useful rule of thumb is toconsider a sales yield of twice the fully loaded
cost per sales rep as the end of the transition
phase. By this point, the company should havea pretty good idea of what to expect in terms ofsteady state sales yield for the product.
In the transition phase, sales management
should focus on developing a repeatable salesmodel, reﬁning market positioning, and add-ing sales capacity at a rate commensurate withthe rise in the slope of the curve. The originalrenaissance reps should continue to stay fo-
cused on learning. The people hired at thisstage—we call them “enlightened reps”—should be comfortable contributing to a still-evolving sales model but do not need to have
the analytical and communication skills of therenaissance reps. 
The execution phase.  
Once sales manage-
ment is conﬁdent that the product hasachieved traction and is entering the execu-tion phase, sales reps can be hired as rapidlyas the company’s management and ﬁnancialconstraints will allow. In this phase, when the
formula for success has been developed and
all of the support requirements for sales repsare in place, the company needs more tradi-tional salespeople—what’s known in the in-dustry as “coin-operated reps”—who requirenothing more than a territory, a sales plan, aprice book, and marketing materials tobring in orders.
 
The Role of Marketing 
Product marketing and marketing communi-
cations should ideally be the center of learn-
ing activities during the initiation phase.Mark eting leadership is responsible for bridg-
ing the gap between customers, sales reps, andthe engineering organization. Everyone onthe marketing team has to be knowledgeableabout the product technology, able to under-stand customers and their needs, and proﬁ-cient at communicating with renaissance reps.But success in this role requires more than justan understanding of the languages of thesedisparate groups and individuals in the com-pany. It requires substantial credibility to con-vince customers, sales, and engineering thattheir needs will be accurately communicatedto the other parties. Marketing must hold theproduct itself to high standards of complete-ness, correctness, and ﬁt.
Once beta testing is complete, the company
must decide when to launch a marketing cam-paign. There can be pressure to start the cam-paign early to support the sales effort, butthat’s an expensive use of scarce cash resources.What’s more, it can distract the organizationfrom its primary learning goal and set false ex-pectations among the sales and engineeringgroups. Worse, a premature marketing cam-paign can set false expectations in the market-place that will be difﬁcult to correct.
As the company tweaks the product and
learns more about the ways customers use it inthe ﬁrst two stages, the positioning will evolve.Marketing communications must develop animble launch schedule that can adjust to therequirements of each stage by preparing collat-
eral materials that can be easily modiﬁed andby working with media and other resources soHiring a full sales force 
too fast just leads the company to burn through cash and fail to meet revenue expectations.
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
harvard business review • july–august 2006 page 10 
they can respond quickly once the ﬁnal prod-
uct and sales strategies have been completed. 
The Role of Engineering 
Keeping the product development engineer-
ing team intact at least through the initiationphase is essential to the success of a new-productlaunch. This is a signiﬁcant challenge for bothcompany executives and engineering manage-
ment: After beta testing is done (and some-times even before), the engineering organiza-tion typically turns to the next product.Cleaning up and making sure that existingproducts are complete and correct is not themost glamorous phase of product develop-ment. What’s more, the reward systems inmost R&D organizations encourage engineersto go on to the next challenge. But when com-panies allow those most intimately knowl-edgeable about a new product to move on,they slow down learning. New engineers haveto be trained, and it takes them longer tomake design modiﬁcations, stretching out thetime required to ramp up sales yield.
Engineering management can take several
steps to provide the right incentives and fosterthe right culture to support the learning curve.The ﬁrst is to introduce an organizational mea-sure that reﬂects the importance of staying fo-cused during launch. Companies measure manu-facturing success in terms of how long it takes
to achieve scale production volumes, and theytypically tie engineering to this metric as well.
To move along the learning curve faster, though,
companies need instead to focus engineering,
as well as marketing and sales, on the time ittakes to reach the break-even and then sustain-
able proﬁtable levels of sales yield. In addition,engineers who stay involved throughout theentire learning process need to be rewarded byan assignment to another big project. 
The Role of General Management 
It is unlikely that incentives will be established
to keep engineers involved with the productonce it hits the market without the direct anddaily involvement of general management. In-deed, during the ﬁrst two phases, the wholemanagement team should be focused on thecustomer frontier, the source of learning. CEOsand division managers must direct the efforts
of those who drive the learning and participatein all crucial product and organizational deci-sions concerning functionality, target markets,sales channels, and marketing strategy.
Too often, executives don’t get actively in-
volved in sales strategy until a revenue gap
appears and cash becomes scarce. But it isduring the early stages of the learning curvethat top management can have maximum im-pact on the ultimate outcome of the venture.Executives need to take responsibility for pro-jecting the shape of the sales learning curvebased on realistic inputs and for ensuring thatall learning opportunities are identiﬁed.Then, the shape of the curve should drive thedesign of revenue, expense, and hiring plansacross the entire organization. The longer theinitiation stage, the longer the learning pe-riod and investment phase will be, and thelower the revenue expectations should beset. The most important role of all for senior
executives is setting realistic expectations—
guided by the curve—for investors, the board,and employees.
High-tech companies routinely “price on the
learning curve”—that is, they deliberately setselling prices low on the early manufacturingruns to stimulate volume that will underwritetheir efforts to gain enough experience tolower costs and ultimately reap higher proﬁts.Like the manufacturing learning curve, thesales learning curve permits you to see all theaspects of a set of activities—in this case, thego-to-market process—through a new lens andto plan appropriately. Applying the sales learn-ing curve as a strategic construct allows man-agement and investors to share a common lan-guage in understanding this phase of thebusiness. And successful management of thesales learning curve allows companies to re-duce the time to proﬁtability and the cost ofbreaking even, increasing the success rate ofstart-ups and new-category product launches. 
Reprint R0607J 
To order, see the next page
or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500or go to www.hbrreprints.org“You come  out, and you 
think yo u have a market-
ready prod uct. Then you 
discover that you really don’t. ”
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023. 
The Sales Learning Curve 
To Order 
For  
Harvard Business Review 
 reprints and 
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500. Go to www.hbrreprints.org
For customized and quantity orders of  
Harvard Business Review 
 article reprints, 
call 617-783-7626, or e-maicustomizations@hbsp.harvard.edu 
page 11 
Further Reading 
ARTICLE 
Match Your Sales Force Structure to Your 
Business Life Cycle 
by Andris A. Zoltners, Prabhakant Sinha, 
and Sally E. Lorimer 
Harvard Business Review 
July–August 2006
Product no. R0607F 
Once you’ve moved from the new product 
phase to more mature phases in your prod-uct life cycle, your sales force structure must change again. Factors to modify include: the roles that internal salespeople and external 
selling partners play; the size of your sales force; the degree of your sale force’s specializa-
tion; and the way salespeople apportion their efforts among different customers, products, and activities. By adjusting these factors, you enable your sales force to re-spond quickly to market opportunities, en-hance their performance, and maintain your company’s profitability.
The authors agree that during the launch 
and growth phases of a new product, com-panies need to focus on assembling the right size sales force, determining whether they can depend on selling partners, and getting the sales force’s degree of specialization right. But when a new offering reaches matu-
rity, firms must hire more general-purpose 
salespeople. When a product goes into de-cline, effective sales leaders then reduce the size of the sales force and use external distri-bution channels to keep the offering afloat for as long as possible.
This document is authorized for use only in James M Lattin, Peter Levine©s Spring 2023 / STRAMGT 351 1,2 / Building and Managing Professional Sales Organizations at Stanford University 
from Mar 2023 to Sep 2023.