Real Estate
Financial Analysis
Workbook
Rev. August 24, 2015

Adjunct Professor John H. Vogel, Jr., Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
created this Workbook.
©2003 Trustees of Dartmouth College. All rights reserved. For permission to reprint, contact the
author or Tuck School of Business at 603-646-3176

65

The Characteristics of Real Estate
Real estate investments have a number of unique and critically important characteristics. The six key
characteristics of real estate are:
1. Fixed Location
2. Non-Standard Pricing
3. Capital Intensive and Often Highly Leveraged
4. Highly Cyclical
5. Locally as well as Nationally Regulated
6. Long Lived and Durable
Consider the financial implications of each of these characteristics and how they impact the value of a real
estate investment over the long term.
Forms of Profit in Real Estate
There are a variety of forms of profit that result from the development and ownership of real estate
investments. Listed below are five key forms of profit.
Cash Flow Before Taxes:

The cash flow generated periodically by the property. Cash flow before
taxes consists of the excess of revenues over expenses including the
payment of debt service but before the impact of federal income taxes.

Tax Shelter Benefits:

The potential benefits unique to real estate from depreciation allowances
and interest deductibility.

Residuals:

The proceeds from the sale or refinancing of a property after all debts and
other expenses have been paid off.

Equity Build-Up:

The growth in an owner’s equity over time as the principal of a mortgage
is repaid.

Fees:

The expenses associated with a real estate transaction.

66

The Set-up
The set-up is a real estate term for the combined income and cash flow statement. The set-up provides
the basis for analyzing a potential real estate investment. By adjusting the assumptions used in a setup, an
investor is able to test their impact on the cash flow.
Gross Revenue
(Vacancy Allowance)
Effective Gross Income (Operating
Expenses) (Property Taxes)
(Structural Reserve)
Net Operating Income
(Debt Service)
Cash Flow Before Taxes
Components of the Set-up
•

Gross Revenue – the analysis begins with the projected rental and other revenues assuming 100%
occupancy.

•

Vacancy Allowance – The appropriate percentage is a function of market conditions. It also
includes an amount for bad debt and concessions.

•

Effective Gross Income (EGI) – The Gross Revenue minus the Vacancy Allowance.

•

Operating Expenses – This includes administrative, maintenance, repairs, insurance and utilities.

•

Property Taxes – The current taxes assessed on the subject property. (This line item is
sometimes included in the operating expense figure.)

•

Structural Reserve – Some amount should be set aside for predictable expenses required to
maintain the property, like a reserve for roof repairs. Some investors deduct this after net
operating income.

•

Net Operating Income (NOI) or Cash Flow from Operations (CFO) – The Effective Gross Income less
operating expense and property taxes. For our purpose it also includes a structural reserve.

•

Debt Service – The annual “constant payment” of principal and interest required to finance the
property.

•

Cash Flow Before Taxes – The Net Operating Income less Debt Service.

67

Real Estate versus Business Profit & Loss
It is useful to compare a standard form of profit and loss statement used for business with real estate cash
flow analysis. An example of each is presented below:
Real Estate Profit & Loss

Business Profit & Loss

Gross Revenue
Less (Vacancy Allowance)
Equals Gross Income
Less (Operating Expenses)
Less (Property Taxes)
Less (Structural Reserve)
Equals Net Operating Income
Less (Debt Service)
Equals Cash Flow Before Taxes

Sales
Less (Cost of Goods Sold)
Equals Effective Gross Profit
Less (Sales, General Admin. Exp.)
Equals Operating Profit
Less (Depreciation)
Less (Interest)
Less (Rent)
Less (Officer Compensation)
Equals Earnings Before Income Taxes

The business profit and loss statement focuses on matching expenses to revenues. In contrast, real estate
profit and loss is represented by a pure cash flow statement. Business profit and loss recognizes
depreciation expense while the real estate profit and loss ignores it. The business statement recognizes
only interest expenses while the real estate statement deducts total debt service including principal as well
as interest. Finally, in business there is a focus on earnings and profit while in real estate cash flow is the
primary focus.
Valuation and Cap Rates
Each real estate project throws off an income stream. This Net Operating Income (NOI) or Cash Flow
from Operations (CFO) can be divided among the lenders and owners. Investing in income-producing
real estate is essentially the purchase and sale of this income stream. Real estate value can be determined
by capitalizing (dividing) an income stream by the overall market rate of return or capitalization rate. The
capitalization rate (or cap rate) is the rate demanded by the market in a typical real estate transaction. It
represents the return an investor can expect the asset to generate the first year. The cap rate is often
lower than the overall rate of return the investor expects because it does not include appreciation.

Net Operating Income
Value =

Cap Rate

Where do cap rates come from? The answer is the market-- much the way the stock market decides the
appropriate price-earnings ratio. Many factors influence cap rates like: projected returns from alternative
investments, inflation expectations, economic growth forecasts and supply and demand. In justifying the
cap rate that an appraiser uses for a particular property the following theoretical justifications are often
presented:
a) Band of Investment Approach: In this approach, the appraiser looks at the annual rate of return
required by equity investors and the interest rate on currently available debt. Each of the
68

rates is weighted by the proportion of total value they represent to determine the
capitalization rate. The return on equity is adjusted based on expectations of the likely
appreciation (or depreciation) of the property.
b) Comparable Sales Approach: Appraisers derive a cap rate by calculating the cap rate on
comparable properties that have recently been sold. They make an adjustment based on
how this particular property stacks up against these comparable properties. In general, we
rely on this approach in this course when selecting the appropriate cap rate.
Keep in mind the following about cap rates:
1. They vary by property type (e.g., office, industrial, retail, multifamily)

2. Cap rates for a particular property are influenced by macro factors like what is happening
in the broader economy and the capital markets as well as local real estate fundamentals
like supply and demand.
The graphs on the next page depict historical cap rates and Treasury yields. Typically cap rates are a
couple of hundred basis points higher than 10-year Treasuries. For example, in 2012, when 10-year
Treasuries were about 2%, average cap rates for high quality properties in the NCREIF index averaged
about 5.5% or a 3.5% spread. As you can see in the graph below, this 3.5% spread changes over time and
is sometimes narrower and sometimes wider. In the early 1980s when 10-year Treasuries were at close to
15%, the spread turned negative because people were so worried about inflation that they preferred an
asset like real estate that would benefit from inflation to an asset like a Treasury which does not.

69

NCREIF Cap Rates vs. 10-Year Treasury
20.0 ...--------------------------------

10.0

5.0

NCREIF transaction cap rate (value weighted)
Cap Rate – Treasure Spread

2012

2011

2010

2009

2005

2006
2007
2008

2003
2004

2002

2001

2000

1999

1995
1996
1997
1998

1992
1993
1994

1989
1990
1991

1986
1987
1988

1983
1984
1985

1982

0.0

10-year Treasury

Discounted Cash Flow Analysis
In deciding whether to invest in a property, investors often look at the potential cash flow from two
perspectives. First, they analyze the stabilized cash flow when the building is 90% or 95% occupied. This
snapshot which has been the subject of most of this workbook allows them to estimate the initial return
they will earn on their equity as well as the value of the property.
The second way that investors analyze the cash flows from a property is to build a model that projects
cash flows into the future and then discount them back to the present. The industry standard is a ten (10)
th
year projection with a terminal or sales value based on capitalizing the NOI in the 11 year. For this
discussion, we will use a five (5) year projection and estimate a sales price based on the NOI in year 6.
The proceeds from the sale should be added to the cash flow in year 5.
The discount rate is different and usually higher than the cap rate. A cap rate represents the initial return
on the project’s cost whereas the discount rate represents the total return, including appreciation that
investors require. It is sometimes called the ‘hurdle rate’.

70

