Required Reading: Class #1

INTRODUCTION TO REAL ESTATE INVESMENT
GSB GEN306:
DOUGLAS ABBEY & CHRIS MAHOWALD
REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT
WINTER 2023
__________________________________________________________________
Why do schools of management study real estate? After all, we don’t study other industries such as
plastics. Here are some answers:
▪
▪
▪
▪
▪
▪
▪

It is the largest asset class in the world;
It is the largest source of personal wealth for many households;
It is the source of many fortunes in the Forbes 400;
Changes in real estate wealth are a key driver for the economy (both up and down!);
Real estate offers diversification potential in a multi-asset portfolio;
It plays an often-underappreciated role in the success (or failure) of most enterprises; and
The built environment reflects the values of a society.

More to the point, you will make a series of real estate decisions in your life: where to live, work, shop,
play, conduct your business and hopefully invest. The class goal is for you to make these decisions with
increased real estate knowledge and judgment. It is helpful to examine a dozen key product features which
underlie real estate and differentiate it from other investment classes. These themes recur throughout the
lectures and case discussions and are fundamental to understanding a real estate investment.
1) Long Life
The typical corporation turns inventory eight times a year. If product does not meet the market, feedback
is rapid and painful (it is called standing inventory). The corporation redesigns, repositions and reprices its
product to move the merchandise! Real estate has a useful life of 40 plus years or, if you wander down
streets in Europe, centuries. Real estate product decisions are permanent, and costly, if not impossible to
fix. How does value hold up over time? How does value compare to the cost of replacing the asset? This
most important feature drives the remaining points of difference.
2) Long Term Supply & Demand Forecasts
By virtue of long life, the successful investor must forecast supply and demand out for decades. How
accurate are the forecasting tools? Forecasting demand for 2030 is no easy task particularly because
demand for most real estate is “derived”. For example, unlike cars or sweaters which sell by the unit,
warehouse space has no intrinsic value; it simply serves as a step in an ever-shifting supply chain.
What factors lead to changes in demand? In simplest terms, the basic building blocks are demographics
and employment, which can be projected at the national level but can be quite challenging to forecast for
an individual city or submarket. Why even does a city exist? What factors will change its ‘raison d’etre’? A
myriad of currents and crosscurrents will influence demand including changes in macro-economic
conditions, incomes, purchasing power, technology, global trade, consumer preferences, public policy,
environmental regulation, regional competitiveness and natural events (earthquakes, rise in sea level).
Let’s shift to supply. How can we predict who will build what and where and when? It may be easy to
forecast short-term supply (work in progress and the development pipeline), but how about long-term
supply? Real estate can range from being a commodity to a virtual monopoly depending on “supply
constraints”. New supply is governed by the spread of value over cost. Is it easy to predict cost and value
over 40 years?

3) Capital Intensity
Developers require significant capital to build a product that will be “consumed” over 40 years (contrast to
a computer program which can be e-mailed to a user at virtually no marginal cost). By virtue of leases,
which have a priority in corporate cash flow, commercial real estate can generate steady cash flow and
therefore support a larger percentage of debt (i.e., 60-70%) than would be typical on a corporate balance
sheet. How can debt and equity be combined to produce a successful investment? Who bears the risks
and rewards? How are returns split between “talent” and “money”? How does a lender protect its
investment? How much leverage is appropriate? Why do publicly traded REITs employ much lower
leverage (i.e., 30%)?
4) High Margins and Operating Leverage
Real estate offers high operating margins to landlords. For real estate where expenses are low (e.g.,
warehouses) and the tenant pays all expenses (known as triple net leases), margins approach 100%. Gross
margins for real estate with higher operating intensity (e.g., hotels) are ~30% - still higher than many
operating businesses. What are the economic implications of this relationship?
5) Unique/Local Product vs. Global/Institutional Asset Class
In contrast to most manufactured products, every real estate property is unique; hence the old saw that the
three keys to real estate are “location, location and location”. Unique location translates into nonstandardized product features, positioning and pricing. The successful investor must be an astute student
of a building’s position in a competitive environment. These skills are partly analytical, but just as much
“walking and talking” and “wearing out shoe leather”. Visualization is a critical skill (the ability to conjure
a building from floor plans and elevations).
Notwithstanding its local dynamics, the global capital markets have transformed commercial real estate
into an institutional asset class over the last several decades. The estimated value of commercial real estate
worldwide is $30+ trillion of which over $16 trillion is in the U.S. Today, pension funds, sovereign wealth
funds, REITs and other institutional players own well over half of the commercial real estate in the U.S.
As a heavily debt financed asset class, there is an estimated $8+ trillion of commercial mortgage debt
secured by U.S. real estate, the majority of which is held by institutional players. What implications do
institutional ownership and lending have for the way commercial real estate is valued?
6) Cyclicality
By virtue of long product life, real estate investment is subject to cycles. Why is real estate more cyclical
than most industries? Demand for consumer products (ie. cars, video games) may crest and wane but real
estate is on a regular program of boom and bust. What factors lead to overbuilding? How long does it
take to return to equilibrium? This leads to another old saw that the three keys to real estate are “timing,
timing, and timing”. What is the optimal capital structure to “survive winter”?
7) Role in an Investment Portfolio
An individual property is illiquid and management intensive with high transaction costs. A property,
unlike a corporation, doesn’t come with management. The investor inserts its own management team.
The case for real estate investment in a multi-asset portfolio (and the argument that real estate is an asset
class) rests on the following:
▪ Real estate is a hard asset;
▪ Real estate can be an inflation hedge;
▪ Real estate can offer stable current income;
▪ Returns may be less volatile than stocks and are not highly correlated to stocks and bonds; and
▪ Potential for diversification within a real estate portfolio (geography, product type, lease structure,
degree of risk).

What causes real estate to behave differently? A lease is similar to a bond -- fixed for some duration
(several days in the case of a hotel, up to 30 years for a single tenant retail building). Leases may be flat or
hedged (i.e., indexed to CPI). Once the lease expires, the return is equity-like depending upon future
supply and demand conditions. Hence, real estate is a hybrid between bonds and equity. The
combination of fixed income characteristics and cyclicality can produce returns that vary from the broader
capital markets.
Diversification can be achieved by investing in the “four quadrants” below. Private real estate is much less
volatile than public REITs because REITS are priced quarterly by appraisers, not the omniscient
marketplace! How should an investor move between these four quadrants to seek value?

Debt

Equity

Public

Private

CMBS

Mortgages

REITs

Institutional /
Doctors & Dentists /
Friends & Family

Should investment performance differ among the four major property types (office, industrial, retail and
apartments)? Where else to invest? Homebuilding is a key part of the economy but is often ignored as a
real estate investment vehicle. Homebuilding is a manufacturing business and returns are highly
dependent upon land appreciation or depreciation. Hotels are a small part of the investment universe and
are an operating business rather than a passive investment. Other exotica include land, timber, resorts,
golf courses, mobile home parks, self-storage, senior living, biotech, data centers and outlet malls.
8) Appreciation/Depreciation
Are buildings like other hard assets which depreciate? Tax and accounting models account for
depreciation but what is the real rate of “economic depreciation”? A “selling” broker’s model shows
regular increases in rent at the inflation rate and values increasing correspondingly. And of course,
residential sales brokers predict ever increasing home values! Why should this be the case? What happens
as buildings age? Do they lose their competitiveness as newer more functional product is built? Does any
“factor of production” appreciate?
9) People Intensity
Real estate transactions are episodic, non-standard, and heavily negotiated. Every transaction is different.
Real estate organizations are small relative to the size of transactions and outsource heavily for expertise
(e.g., brokers, engineers, architects, attorneys, environmental consultants, market analysts). Real estate
loans and partnerships are expected to survive for many years. The human element is key to success.
While institutions are dominant in real estate (banks, insurance companies, pension funds), “you do
business with people, not institutions”. How people are paid can influence the outcome of a real estate
investment. It is important to understand how the various parties to a real estate transaction are motivated
and compensated.
Real estate is a local business requiring “boots on the ground” experience, contacts, and knowledge. Local
entrepreneurs are often undercapitalized to undertake a project and typically seek a capital partner. This
marriage between local talent and money requires careful thought to align interests. How is the local team
compensated? Who bears the risk and how are returns split?

10) Tenant Focus
Many describe real estate as a relationship business. The most important relationship is between the
landlord and the tenant which drives income and may differentiate one building from another in the eyes
of a tenant. This translates into higher (or lower!) occupancies, rents, and income which in turn drive
value, financeability and ultimately – investment returns. Successful real estate developers can take tenant
relationships on the road to other markets. How does a landlord build and maintain these tenant
relationships?
11) Legal Intensity
When a company sells a box of soap there is no contract. Real estate is a “bundle” of rights to use
property. Land use is heavily regulated at the local, state and federal levels. When all or a part of the
“bundle” is leased, sold, or pledged as security, the agreement must stand the test of time. Legal
documents are complex and often heavily negotiated to protect the rights and mitigate the risk of various
parties who have significant capital invested for long periods of time. Some people describe the real estate
business as a long series of negotiations.
12) The Built Environment Reflects the Values of a Society
For millennia, cities have been centers of innovation. Great cities attract entrepreneurs and have a
vibrancy on the street which enlivens residents and attracts talent and visitors worldwide. Concentrated
economic activity is profitable to owners of real estate, yet some cities are in decline. As a Dutch observer
asked, “Why do you Americans throw away your cities?”
How and why do land use patterns evolve? Why is most of America’s suburban office space located in a
“favored quadrant”? How do we allocate land between buildings and open space? How do land use
patterns affect global warming? How does land use policy affect income distribution, racial integration
and school quality? Who benefits from policies designed to foster homeownership? (Hint: Most of the
benefit of the mortgage deduction goes to the wealthiest households.) Do insiders or outsiders decide
who gets to live in a community?
What makes a city vibrant? As Justice Potter Stewart answered in reference to pornography, “I know it
when I see it.” Surely, we can agree that a neighborhood is lively when there are interesting shops,
restaurants, and foot traffic. How important is safety to “walkable urbanity”? What conditions create
urban spaces that “work”? We will explore this topic in the “Hittin’ the Pavement” assignment.
Megatrends
Buildings are designed and constructed to last for a generation or more. As societies become more
innovative, the way we use real estate changes. Consider how the automobile allowed cities to expand
their geographic boundaries and the way technology has diminished the importance of centralized office
locations. Megatrends are causing society and the economy to evolve in difficult-to-anticipate ways. In
the last 10 years, several of these megatrends have had (and are having) dramatic and seemingly
transformational impacts on real estate:
 eCommerce
 Covid
 Inflationary Forces
 The sharing economy
 Autonomous vehicles
 Mobile technology
How do real estate developers and investors incorporate the shifting landscape into the built environment?
Is there a place for the shopping mall or the office building in the future? Will buildings need parking lots?

How do city planners adapt building codes and zoning regulations to account for the way we will use
buildings?
Real Estate Web
These factors set the stage for analyzing a real estate investment. Success in investing then requires
analyzing a “stack” of factors ranging from the macro economy to what’s happening on the block:
 Macro & global economy
 Consumer Preferences
 Technology
 Global health
 Climate Change
 Incomes
 Demographics
 Capital markets
 Position in cycle
 Aggregate property demand
 Local economy
 Government policy
 Metro supply/demand
 Submarket dynamics
 Subject property features
 Competitive market position
A successful real estate investor or developer must take each of these factors into account and evaluate the
dynamics between them to come up with a “point of view”. Let’s combine the differentiating factors and
the real estate “stack” to create the real estate “web”.

Surely this is a complex puzzle. And it is just a start. After the real estate risk and opportunity analysis,
what is the appropriate capital and legal structure? And how about all the people required to negotiate,
close and execute the strategy? To be a wise real estate investor requires curiosity, intelligence, insight,
negotiating skills, perseverance and the ability to manage and motivate people. Opportunities exist

because no one has unlocked the right combination. Projects fail because an important factor is neglected.
At the end of the day, all the effort and analysis is distilled into the most important ingredient: real estate
judgment which is the critical factor for successful real estate investment.

The questions raised above are faced every day in managing a real estate enterprise. We will attempt to
answer many of these questions throughout the course. These differentiating features will be useful lenses
to evaluate the cases and more broadly to understand the essentials of real estate investment.

