September 2019
A Basic Primer on the Investment Committee Process
Caleb Cragle, GSB ‘20
Overview:
The Investment Committee process outlines how a real estate firm reviews, pursues and approves deals
for investment. There are generally four stages of the process, each with key decisions, deliverables, and
levels of commitment to the deal: 1) Initial Screening; 2) Pre-PSA Execution; 3) End of Due
Diligence Period; and 4) Pre-Closing.

1. Initial Screening: We received a new deal and have reviewed the materials. Should we dig in and learn more?
After getting a new deal in, there are a few binary items that must be reviewed and confirmed before
spending more time on a deal. If any of these are not present, the deal will likely die after the initial
review. At this stage, most detailed diligence will not be available and most information will come from a
broker package or conversations with the seller:
•
•
•
•
•

Size – Can we do a deal of this size? Too big or too small for our target?
Returns – Can the deal generate returns that match our requirements?
Asset Type – Is this an asset class we do? Any quirks (ground lease, specialized tenant)?
Business Plan – Is the business plan something we can execute?
Market – Is the market one we like or are actively investing within?

If the deal fits within the initial screening criteria, then it likely makes sense to request additional
information, potentially visit the property in person, and then enter the bidding process to acquire the
asset.

2. Before Signing the Purchase & Sale Agreement: We’ve dug into the deal. Do we want to buy it?
After confirming that a new deal meets the criteria of a firm’s investment strategy and capabilities, the
second stage of a deal is winning the bidding process for an asset. There might still be major outstanding
questions about the property at this stage, but many times detailed due diligence is only made available
once a bid has been accepted by the seller. Once selected as the winning bidder, the buyer enters
negotiations on the Purchase & Sale Agreement (PSA).
The investment committee will have a second discussion prior to finalizing a PSA to confirm that no
major issues have been discovered while visiting the property or conducting diligence, in addition to
confirming that any clauses in the PSA are acceptable. Key items to confirm before signing a PSA
include:
•
•
•

Site Tour: Has the team visited the Property and competitor buildings as well?
Detailed Proforma: Reviewed and updated proforma with all available diligence?
PSA: PSA clauses acceptable (price, any seller or buyer credits, timeline, deposits)?

•

Debt Financing: Debt quotes with acceptable terms received?

Most PSA documents require a deposit at execution, but usually these deposits are refundable if the deal
doesn’t close. While it can be costly to spend time signing up deals that don’t ultimately close, the firm
can keep moving forward even without final information as a result, as exposure is minimal until
deposits become non-refundable.
Most PSA documents allow 30-60 days for due diligence following the execution of the document
before deposits become non-refundable.

3. Before a Non-Refundable Deposit Deadline: The moment of truth – is the deal what we expected?
Once the PSA is signed, the investment team must complete a comprehensive due diligence process
covering all physical, economic, and other items regarding the property prior to the due diligence
deadline. This is the most important deadline in the investment committee process, as the firm’s
economic exposure is minimal until this deadline has passed.
Key items to review and confirm include:
•

•
•

Third Party Reports
o Property Condition Report – reviews capex and physical repairs needed in the future
o Environmental Report – reviews environmental issues at the property and remediation
o Seismic Report (if in earthquake zone) – reviews building characteristics for seismic
risk
o Appraisal for debt financing – opinion of value for loan LTV calculation
Title & Survey Review
Property diligence review – includes all contracts, leases, historical financials, tax bills, budgets,
contractor quotes, zoning, municipal requirements, etc.

There are always issues that arise in diligence – major issues may lead to adjustments to the PSA or the
buyer leaving the deal completely. An example might be a major environmental issue that was previously
not known. In that case, a seller might have to provide a credit to the buyer for the costs of remediating
the environmental issue.
This stage is generally considered the most official part of the investment committee process, where
approval to fund is given or revoked depending on the findings of the full diligence review. In most
cases, a real estate firm can get most or all their deposit money back until this stage is passed.

4. Before Closing
Prior to closing, a final update of the entire deal must be compiled and presented to the investment
committee to confirm that any changes during the closing process are acceptable. These include the final
terms for debt financing, additional capex discovered, tenants vacating, environmental issues, and other
physical, economic, or reputational change that might affect the investment. A final proforma model
should be calculated with final numbers at this time, which will serve as the basis for future budgets
during the hold period.

